sound is a kind of energy. loud means high in (sound energy ; sound intensity). form means kind. a kind of something is an example of that something. 
protecting something means preventing harm to that something. damage means harm. as the thickness (of something ; of an object) increases , the resistance to damage (of that object ; of that something) will increase. fire causes harm (to trees ; to forests ; to living things). bark is a protective covering around the (trunk of ; branches of) a tree. protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). protection means resistance to damage increases. thickness is a measure of how thick an object is. a tree is a kind of living thing. thickness is a property of an object and includes ordered values of (thin ; thick). bark is a part of a tree. a part of something means a characteristic of something. helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
when a mineral is rubbed on a streak plate , some of the material breaks off and forms a powder. streak is a measure of the color of a mineral below the surface or as a powder. streak is a property of a mineral. red is a kind of color. a white tile can be used as a streak plate. 
Boston is city that is near to the coast of the Atlantic Ocean. a coast is where land meets the edge of a body of water. humidity is the amount of (water vapor ; moisture) (in the air ; in the atmosphere). An example of moisture is water vapor in the atmosphere. atmosphere means air. as distance from water decreases , humidity will increase. near means close. an ocean is a kind of body of water. close means low in distance. to lower means to decrease. high is similar to increase. 
a magnet attracts (magnetic metals ; ferromagnetic metals) through magnetism. iron is a kind of metal. iron is always magnetic. if a magnet is attracted to a metal then that magnet will stick to that metal. if something contains a large amount of magnetic material then that something will attract magnets. 
fins are a part of aquatic animals used for moving through water. tuna is a kind of fish. a fish is a kind of aquatic animal. tuna eat fish. if an animal eats another animal then that animal is a carnivore or omnivore or predator. some predators move quickly to catch prey. large fins can be used to move quickly through water. prey is a kind of food for predators. a predator eats other animals for food. swimming is when (humans ; animals) can move in water. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). helping something has a positive impact on that something. an (animal ; living thing) requires nutrients for survival. an animal needs to eat food for nutrients. if an organism 's prey moves quickly then that organism may need to move quickly to catch its prey. an aquatic animal is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. an organism is a living thing. if a living thing requires something then that something has a positive impact on that living thing. if a living thing requires something then that something has a positive impact on that living thing. 
a leaf performs (photosynthesis ; gas exchange). green plants provide food for (themselves ; animals ; consumers) by performing photosynthesis. photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. a leaf is a part of a green plant. a plant requires sunlight for photosynthesis. the sun is a source of (light ; light energy) called sunlight. an plant requires food for survival. make means produce. In the photosynthesis process (carbon dioxide ; water ; sunlight) has the role of raw material. if something is a raw material in a process then that something is required for that process. to be used for something means to be required by that something. if something performs a task then that task is that something 's function. to have a function is similar to to be responsible for. 
drought means available water decreases in an environment. drought is when amount of precipitation decreases. as available water decreases , the population of plants will decrease. a marsh willow herb is a kind of plant. a (plants ; living things) require water for (survival ; to grow). a drought is a kind of slow environmental change. precipitation is when water falls from the sky. an ecosystem is a kind of habitat. an environment is similar to an ecosystem. damp means a large amount of water. aquatic (animals ; plants) live in bodies of water. an (aquatic animal ; aquatic plant) requires great amounts of water to (survive ; thrive). 
decomposition is when a decomposer breaks down dead organisms. decomposition is when a decomposer (recycles ; returns) nutrients from dead organisms to the soil by eating those dead organisms. (high quality ; rich ; good) soil has a high number of nutrients. fertile soil is high in quality. a decomposer is a kind of living thing. an organism is a living thing. an animal is a kind of organism. a plant is a kind of organism. decomposition increases the amount of nutrients in the soil. increase means more. an organism is made of organic matter. plant and animal matter means organic matter. 
cold environments usually have little food for animals. a warm environment usually has more food than a cold environment. migration is when animals move themselves from a cooler climate to a warmer climate for the winter. flying is a kind of motion air. south is a kind of direction. motion is when moves (an object ; something) to a direction. changes in an environment cause (animals ; plants) to adapt to survive. a bird is a kind of animal. (colder ; cooler) means lower in temperature. cooler means colder. migration is a kind of adaptation. winter has cold (temperatures ; weather). a climate is synonymous with an environment. an animal is a kind of living thing. a living thing is a kind of object. to lower means to decrease. a decrease is a kind of change. 
instructions are a part of kits. a person requires instructions to assemble (a kit ; something). assembling means putting together. a kit usually contains materials for assembling something. Rachel is a name for a human. person is synonymous with human. if something requires something else then that something else is important to that something. 
a computer controls a robot. an animal 's brain controls that animal. a brain is a part of an animal. if two things perform the same function then those two things are similar. controlling is a kind of function. a human is a kind of animal. 
the Earth rotating on its axis causes the sun to appear to move across the sky during the day. the sun rises in the east. the sun sets in the west. rising is a kind of motion. setting is a kind of motion. if a human is on a rotating planet then other celestial bodies will appear to move from that human 's perspective. Earth is a kind of planet. the Sun is a kind of star. a star is a kind of (celestial object ; celestial body). the Earth rotates on its axis on its axis. 
a squid produces thrust by pushing water out of its body. producing thrust causes (something ; an animal ; an object) to move. a rocket engine is used to produce thrust by pushing gases out at a high speed. a rocket engine is used to move a rocket. a rocket is a kind of mechanical system. a rocket is a kind of vehicle. a vehicle is a kind of object. water is a kind of liquid. a liquid is a kind of substance. gas is a kind of substance. 
a tape measure is used to measure (length ; distance). cutting a material usually requires measuring length. a tape measure is a kind of tool for (measuring distance ; measuring length). building something often requires measuring the materials. wood is a kind of natural material. determining often requires (measuring ; observing). 
the Earth rotating on its axis causes stars to appear to move across the sky at night. if a human is on a rotating planet then other celestial bodies will appear to move from that human 's perspective. the Earth rotates on its axis on its axis. Earth is a kind of planet. a star is a kind of (celestial object ; celestial body). 
heat is a kind of energy. light is a kind of energy. sound is a kind of energy. form means kind. 
In the food chain process an animal has the role of consumer which eats (producers ; other animals) for food. In the food chain process a green plant has the role of producer. a leaf is a part of a green plant. a deer is a kind of animal. green plants provide food for (themselves ; animals ; consumers) by performing photosynthesis. a process is a kind of event. 
when something breaks , a crack may form in that something. weathering means breaking down (rocks ; surface materials) from larger whole into smaller pieces by weather. a boulder is a kind of large rock. to cause the formation of means to form. 
as the thickness of an object increases , the resistance (to tearing ; to breaking) will increase. thickness is a property of an object and includes ordered values of (thin ; thick). a paper is a kind of object. as the resistance to something increases , how easilty that something can be done will decrease. a property of something is a feature of that something. 
a rock is a kind of object. rock is made of minerals. all minerals are formed by natural geological processes. objects are made of (materials ; substances ; matter). the properties of something are used for describing that something. composed of means made of. composition is a property of (an object ; matter). 
(boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. when a gas in an open container (evaporates ; boils) , that gas spreads out into the air. glass is a kind of open container. water is a kind of liquid. (matter ; materials ; substances) are made of (atoms ; particles). expand means spread out. water is a kind of substance. matter with variable volume and shape (assumes ; expands to fill ; takes) the shape and size of its entire container. Matter in the gas phase has variable shape. Matter in the gas phase has variable volume. 
a plant is a kind of living thing. a greenhouse is used to protect plants by keeping them warm. a greenhouse is a kind of shelter for plants. a lemon tree is a kind of plant. protecting something means preventing harm to that something. killing means harming something causing death. if a living thing becomes too cold then that living thing will die. cold means low in temperature. if the (environmental temperature ; air temperature) is too cold then (an animal ; a living thing) in that environment may become cold. death means to die. a greenhouse is used to protect plants from the cold. (temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). winter means (environmental ; outdoor) temperature decreases. solution is similar to a positive impact. protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). 
freezing means changing from a liquid into a solid by reducing heat energy. juice is a kind of liquid. Matter in the liquid phase has variable shape. definite is the opposite of variable. Matter in the solid phase has definite shape. if something is definite in shape then that something will not change shape easily. staying means not changing. 
an anemometer is used to measure wind speed. wind speed is a property of weather. an anemometer is a kind of instrument for measuring wind speed. 
a glacier causes mechanical weathering. mechanical weathering is when rocks are broken down by mechanical means. soil is formed by weathering. scraping an object may cause small particles to break off of that object. soil is made of very small (rocks ; minerals). a rock is a kind of object. to form means to create. 
an electric toothbrush is a kind of electric device. electrical devices are used for (industrial purposes ; household purposes) by humans. electricity is used as an energy source by electrical devices. metal is an (electrical ; electrical energy) conductor. electrical conduction is when (metals ; electrical conductors) conduct electricity through (a wire ; electrical conductor ; metal). when an electrical conductor is plugged into an outlet , a circuit is completed. completing a circuit causes (electricity ; electric current) to flow through that circuit. An electrical conductor is a vehicle for the flow of electricity. electric devices require electrical energy to function. conductivity is a property of a (material ; substance). if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. a prong is a kind of object. metal is a kind of material. a complete electrical circuit is a source of electrical energy. 
farming is when a human plants crops for food. a farmer is a kind of human. crops are a kind of edible plant for eating. soil is a renewable resource for growing plants. a plant requires soil for (survival ; to grow). crop rotation is when different crops are planted on a field in different years. crop rotation (renews ; protects) soil. crop rotation has a positive impact on soil quality. a renewable resource is a kind of naturally replaced resource. a farmer farms (crops ; plants) for food. 
eye color is an inherited characteristic. the colors of the parts of an organism are inherited characteristics. a human is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. trait is synonymous with characteristic. inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). (children ; young) is synonymous with offspring. eyes are a part of a human for seeing. a child is a kind of young human. 
trees are a renewable resource. coal is used for generating heat by burning. burning wood is used to produce heat. . a tree contains wood. generate means produce. 
if fossils of a water animal or plant are found in a place then that place used to be covered by water in the past. the Appalachian Mountains are a kind of mountain. clams live at the bottom of the ocean. an environment is a kind of place. a (mountain ; mountain range) is a kind of environment. a clam is a kind of aquatic animal. an aquatic animal is a kind of animal. aquatic animal means water animal. an ocean is a kind of body of water. 
recycling (reduces ; decreases) the amount of water sent to landfills. recycling has a positive impact on the environment. less means a reduced amount. trash is synonymous with waste. a positive impact is a benefit. 
humans changing (ecosystems ; environments) usually has a negative impact on an (ecosystem ; organisms living in an ecosystem). humans changing animal habitats usually causes harm to those animals. a hare is similar to a rabbit. a rabbit is a kind of animal. some hares live in fields. a field is a kind of habitat. some humans live in houses. building housing developments usually requires (replacing ; destroying) animal habitats. if an (animal 's ; organisms) habitat (no longer exists ; ceases to exist) then (that animal ; that organism) will die. something being destroyed means that something no longer exists. a field is a kind of environment. if an (animal 's ; organisms) habitat (no longer exists ; ceases to exist) then (that animal ; that organism) will die. an animal is a kind of organism. harming an animal species causes that animal 's population to decrease. if the population of an animal decreases then that animal may no longer be found in that place. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. humans moving into an environment usually causes native species to lose their habitats. 
peas is a kind of seed. corn is a kind of seed. a seed is a part of a plant. In the food chain process an animal has the role of consumer which eats (producers ; other animals) for food. a human is a kind of animal. consumers eat other organisms. a plant is a kind of organism. humans sometimes eat seeds. food web is synonymous with food chain. green plants are a kind of producer. 
the Earth revolving around the sun causes stars to appear in different areas in the sky at different times of year. a constellation contains stars. Leo is a kind of constellation. 
erosion of soil has a negative impact on the (environment ; soil quality). a coast is where land meets the edge of a body of water. to impact means to affect. (wind and rain ; storms) cause erosion. a hurricane is a kind of storm. a hurricane has large amounts of rain. a hurricane has high wind speeds. coastline means coast. a coast is a kind of environment. 
a sand dune is a kind of land formation. (sand dunes ; arches) are formed by the wind transporting and depositing sand. sand dunes are made of sand. wind (carries ; transports) (sand ; dirt) from one place to another place. to cause the formation of means to form. to cause means to result in. 
if crops are sprayed with something then that something will be on the crop 's surface. humans eat crops. a pesticide is infrequently poisonous to humans. eating food that contains pesticides can have a negative impact on humans. a pesticide is used for protecting plants by killing insects. a pesticide is usually very poisonous to insects. poison causes harm (to living things ; organisms). a human is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. using a pesticide usually requires spraying that pesticide on crops. if an animal eats a crop with something on its surface then that animal will eat the something on the surface. (a concern ; a problem) is a possible negative impact. a poison is very poisonous. 
poison causes harm (to living things ; organisms). a frog is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. polluting means something poisonous is added to an environment. a body of water is a kind of environment. harming an animal species causes that animal 's population to decrease. to decline means to decrease. a poison is very poisonous. a mountain chorus frog is a kind of frog. if a substance is dissolved in another substance then that substance is added to that other substance. water is a kind of liquid. a liquid is a kind of substance. a poison is a kind of substance. poisoning an environment means poisoning the organisms in that environment. an organism is a living thing. 
natural gas is a nonrenewable resource. natural gas is a source of heat by burning. a source of heat can be used to heat something. 
a stove generates heat for cooking usually. if (a thermal conductor ; an object) is exposed to a source of heat then (that conductor ; that object) may become (hot ; warm). (pot ; pan ; frying pan) is made of metal for cooking. metal is a (thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. a thermal conductor is made of materials that conduct thermal energy. metal is a kind of material. conductivity is a property of a (material ; substance). if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. a (pan ; frying pan) is a kind of container for (cooking ; food). a container is a kind of object. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. a container contains (objects ; material ; substances). a spoon is a kind of object. if (one surface ; one substance ; one object) touches something then one is exposed to that something. heating means adding heat. being (on something ; placed in something ; placed over something) means touching that something. if (a spoon ; an object) is used to stir a (liquid ; mixture) then (that spoon ; that object) is touching (that liquid ; that mixture). food is a kind of object. soup is a kind of food. if a container contains something then that container touches that something. to conduct is similar to to transfer. 
coal is used to produce electricity by burning in coal-fire power stations. 
a fork is a kind of object. an insulator is the opposite of a conductor. rubber is an (electrical ; electrical energy ; thermal ; thermal energy) insulator. wood is an (electrical ; electrical energy ; thermal energy) insulator. plastic is usually an electrical insulator. metal is an (electrical ; electrical energy) conductor. if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. conductivity is a property of a (material ; substance). metal is a kind of material. electricity means electrical energy. 
recycling has a positive impact on the environment. recycling (reduces ; decreases) the amount of water sent to landfills. waste has a negative impact on the environment. best means most positive. recycling is a kind of method of disposal. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. protecting nature has a positive impact on the environment. An example of protecting the environment is reducing (the amount of waste ; the amount of pollutants). 
solar energy is a renewable resource. coal is a nonrenewable resource. a renewable resource is a kind of naturally replaced resource. the sun is the source of solar energy called sunlight. an energy source is a kind of resource. fuel is a kind of energy source. coal is a kind of fossil fuel. 
gills are a part of a fish used for breathing water. a structure of something is synonymous with a part of that something. gills are a part of trout. breathing is when a gill converts from oxygen in water into oxygen in blood. gills are used for breathing water by aquatic animals. a structure is a kind of feature. classifying means grouping (objects ; materials) by their properties. a property of something is a feature of that something. trout is a kind of fish. a fish is a kind of aquatic animal. an aquatic animal is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. a living thing is a kind of object. 
food is a source of energy for (animals ; plants). food is a kind of resource. 
living things all require energy for survival. the sun is the source of energy for life on Earth. life means living things. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. 
the Sun is the star that is closest to Earth. a star is a kind of (celestial object ; celestial body). the Sun is a kind of star. 
seconds are a kind of unit for measuring time. seconds are used to measure time. 
weathering means breaking down (rocks ; surface materials) from larger whole into smaller pieces by weather. (rocks ; soil ; materials) interacting with (wind ; moving water) over long periods of time causes weathering. cycles of freezing and thawing water cause ice wedging. ice wedging is a kind of mechanical weathering. causing is a kind of affecting. 
alloys are made of two or more metals. copper is a kind of metal. brass is made of copper and zinc. brass is a kind of alloy. an element is not an alloy. zinc is a kind of metal. aluminum is a kind of element. lead is a kind of element. gold is a kind of element. to be a combination of means to be made of. 
oceans contains most of earth 's water. the ocean contains large amounts of salt water. oceans cover 70% of the surface of the earth. most means over 50%. an ocean is a kind of body of water. a body of water contains water. contains means located in. 
cooking causes a chemical reaction. baking is similar to cooking. chemical reactions cause chemical change. 
Earth is a kind of planet. the sun is the largest celestial body in our solar system. the Sun is a kind of star. a star is a kind of (celestial object ; celestial body). a star is usually larger than a planet. a planet 's moon is smaller than that planet. Jupiter is a kind of planet. the Moon is Earth 's moon. a planet is a kind of celestial (object ; body). a moon is a kind of celestial (object ; body). (larger ; bigger) is the opposite of smaller. 
the Grand Canyon was formed by the Colorado River flowing over long periods of time. a river is a kind of flowing body of water. the Colorado River is a kind of river. flowing is a kind of motion. most canyons are formed by flowing rivers through erosion over long periods of time. (motion ; movement) means (moving ; to move). soil erosion is when (wind ; moving water ; gravity) move soil from (fields ; environments). to cause the formation of means to form. if something causes a process then that something is required for that process. if something requires something else then that something else is important to that something. 
(boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. water is in the gas state , called water vapor , for temperatures between (373 ; 212 ; 100) and 100000000000 (K ; F ; C). evaporation is a kind of process. 
mica has a nonmetallic luster. mica is black in color. if a mineral can be scratched by a fingernail then that mineral is soft. mica is soft. hardness is a property of a (material ; an object) and includes ordered values of (malleable ; rigid). color is a property of (an object ; a material). black is a kind of color. luster is a property of (an object ; a material). a mineral is a kind of object. the properties of something can be (used to identify ; used to describe) that something. nonmetallic is a kind of luster. mica is a kind of mineral. soft is a kind of hardness. 
a plant stem is the vehicle for transporting water and food from roots to the rest of the plant. a plant stem contains a system of tubes for transporting water and nutrients to other parts of the plant. 
shale can be metamorphosed into slate by increased pressure. shale is a kind of sedimentary rock. slate is a kind of metamorphic rock. extreme heat and pressure (change ; metamorphose) rock into metamorphic rock. extreme means very high in value. high is similar to increase. 
nearly all fossils are found in sedimentary rock. organisms can be preserved in sedimentary rock. fossil means preserved remains of organisms. 
the digestive system digests food for the body. the digestive system breaks food into nutrients for the body. (eating ; digestion) is when an organism takes in nutrients from food into itself by eating. 
cellular respiration is when a cell converts from oxygen and carbohydrates into carbon dioxide, water, and energy. carbohydrates are made of sugars. an animal cell is a kind of cell. all cells perform cellular respiration. In the (cellular respiration ; respiration) process carbon dioxide is a waste product. cellular respiration is cellular digestion. converting is similar to producing. 
an electric fan is a kind of electrical device for (cooling ; ventilation). electrical devices convert electricity into other forms of energy. electricity means electrical energy. the vanes rotating in an electric fan causes air to move. an electric motor is a part of an electric fan for rotating the vanes in the fan. (motion ; movement) means (moving ; to move). rotation is a kind of motion. 
a plant is a kind of living thing. a bird is a kind of animal. (matter ; materials ; substances) are made of (atoms ; particles). objects are made of (materials ; substances ; matter). a living thing is a kind of object. valley quail are a kind of quail. quail are a kind of bird. an animal is a kind of living thing. aluminum is a kind of metal. metal is a kind of material. a redwood tree is a kind of tree. a tree is a kind of plant. water is a kind of substance. 
birds sometimes eat (berries ; seeds). seed dispersal is when the seeds of a plant are moved from the plant to a new environment. a bird is a kind of animal. (birds ; some animals) are a vehicle for spreading the seeds of a plant. seed dispersal is when the seeds of a plant (are moved ; are carried ; are spread ; are dropped ; ) from the parent plant to another area. fruit contains seeds. a berry is a kind of fruit. an environment means an area. 
An example of camouflage is when something (is ; has) the same color as its environment. a hare is similar to a rabbit. a rabbit is a kind of animal. coloration is a kind of adaptation for (hiding ; camouflage). coloration means a thing 's color. An example of camouflage is when something changes color in order to have the same color as its environment. camouflage is a kind of adaptation for hiding in an environment. helping something has a positive impact on that something. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). hiding is a kind of protection (against predators ; from predators). if an animal 's fur is a color then that animal is that color. fur is a covering around the body of an animal. camouflage is used for (protection ; hiding) by (prey ; animals) (against predators ; from predators). when snow falls in an environment in an environment , that environment will become white. snow falls during the winter in some environments. snow falls during the winter in the arctic environment. brown is a kind of color. white is a kind of color. to turn means to change. fur is often part of an animal. 
(glass ; objects made of glass) cause refraction of light. marble is a kind of (object ; material). light is a kind of wave. refraction is when a wave (goes through ; transmits through ; passes through) (a surface ; a material ; an object) and travels in a different direction relative to the angle of incidence. refraction is when light bends. refraction causes something (to appear ; to look) different. 
flippers are a part of a sea turtle. flippers are used for moving in water. a sea turtle lives in the ocean. (organisms ; living things) live in (their habitat ; their home). a sea turtle is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. an ocean is a kind of body of water. a structure is a kind of feature. a structure of something is synonymous with a part of that something. a body of water is a kind of environment. habitat is similar to environment. (to help ; to benefit) means to be of use. 
the cell nucleus controls many of the functions of the cell. a cell nucleus is a part of a cell. a plant cell is a kind of cell. a function is an activity. to have a function is similar to to be responsible for. 
the (lunar surface ; moon 's surface) contains many craters. the moon 's surface contains highlands. the moon 's surface contains flat areas. made up of means (contains ; made of). 
ice cream is a kind of solid. moving an object from a cool place to a warm place causes the object 's temperature to increase. a freezer is used for cooling things. melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. to add means to increase. a freezer is (cool ; cold) in temperature. (temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). melting is when solids are heated above their melting point. heating means adding heat. temperature is a measure of heat energy. left out of means moved from. 
sugar dissolves in water when they are combined. 
mold is a kind of fungus. a decomposer is usually a bacterium or fungus. In the food chain process fungi have the role of decomposer. 
a cell wall is a part of a plant cell for supporting and protecting the cell membrane. a cell wall provides (support ; protection ; shape ; structure) for a plant cell. the cell membrane is the membrane around the cell of all living things. a plant cell is a kind of cell. providing support is a kind of function. 
down is a kind of small feather. down is soft. soft is a kind of touch sensation. touching something means feeling that something. 
centimeters ( cm ) are a unit used for measuring (length ; distance) generally used for values between 1 and 250. a string is usually short in length with values between 2 and 1000 cm. 
the lungs are a part of the body of an animal used for breathing air. a tadpole is a kind of (young ; baby) frog. a frog is a kind of animal. an animal requires oxygen for (survival ; to breathe). breathing is when a lung converts from oxygen in air into oxygen in blood. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. 
protecting nature has a positive impact on the environment. a nature preserve is a kind of protected area. an environment means an area. An example of protecting the environment is creating protected areas. creating is a kind of activity. 
roots are a part of a (plant ; tree). grass is a kind of green plant. if two things have the same features then those two things are alike. a structure is a kind of feature. a structure of something is synonymous with a part of that something. grass does not contain wood. 
a lever is a kind of simple machine. a lever is used for (lifting ; moving) heavy objects. a rock is a kind of object. 
reflecting (light ; sound) is the opposite of absorbing (light ; sound). if (an object ; a substance) absorbs solar energy then (that object ; that substance) will increase in temperature. if (an object ; something) is in the sunlight then (that object ; that something) will absorb solar energy. shiny (things ; objects) reflect light. keeping cool means not increasing temperature. a car is a kind of object. 
copper is a kind of metal. metal is an (electrical ; electrical energy) conductor. an insulator is the opposite of a conductor. brick is an (electrical ; electrical energy) insulator. plastic is usually an electrical insulator. wood is an (electrical ; electrical energy ; thermal energy) insulator. electricity means electrical energy. metal is a kind of material. material means substance. 
a compass is used for determining direction. a compass is used to navigate (oceans ; seas). if a person is lost at sea then that person may not know the direction of land. navigation requires knowing direction. An example of navigation is directing a boat. a shore is the land found at the edge of a body of water. a compass is a kind of object. 
pedals are part of a bicycle for pedalling. pedalling a bicycle requires moving the pedals in a circular motion. moving in a circle means moving in a circular motion. 
(mass ; weight) is a property of (matter ; objects ; materials). heaviest means greatest (mass ; weight). a rock is a kind of object. 
a balance is used for measuring (mass ; weight) (of an object ; of a substance). a balance is a kind of instrument for (measuring mass ; measuring weight). instrument means tool. determining often requires (measuring ; observing). 
rain is a kind of water. raining is when rain falls from clouds to the (Earth ; ground) as a liquid. a kind of something is an example of that something. 
pumice is a kind of igneous rock. (igneous rocks ; minerals) are formed from (magma ; lava) cooling. igneous is a kind of rock. a type is synonymous with a kind. 
shelter can protect (animals ; humans) from weather. an animal needs to move to find shelter. an animal requires shelter. seeking something means (trying to find ; searching for) something. rain is a kind of precipitation. precipitation is a kind of weather. 
humans changing (ecosystems ; environments) usually has a negative impact on an (ecosystem ; organisms living in an ecosystem). leave alone means not change. humans changing animal habitats usually causes harm to those animals. an aquatic animal is a kind of animal. a fish is a kind of aquatic animal. a bird is a kind of animal. if a habitat is destroyed then that habitat can not support animals. person is synonymous with human. when a habitat can support living things , living things can live in that habitat. an animal is a kind of living thing. something being destroyed means that something no longer exists. if an (animal 's ; organisms) habitat (no longer exists ; ceases to exist) then (that animal ; that organism) will die. (nonliving ; non-living ; die) is the opposite of (living ; alive ; live). harming an animal species causes that animal 's population to decrease. if the population of an animal decreases then that animal may no longer be found in that place. humans changing an environment sometimes causes that environment to be destroyed. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. habitat is similar to environment. 
Earth 's tilt on its axis causes seasons (to change ; to occur). the Earth being tilted on its axis causes seasons. summer is when a hemisphere is tilted towards the sun. winter is when a hemisphere is tilted away from the sun. winter is a kind of season. summer is a kind of season. to cause means to be responsible for. 
tearing means changing a whole into pieces. a piece of an object is smaller in size than the whole object. a paper bag is a kind of object. size is a property of objects and includes ordered values of (microscopic ; tiny ; small ; medium ; large). the properties of something are used for describing that something. tearing means ripping. 
coal is used to produce electricity by burning in coal-fire power stations. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. coal mine is a source of coal under the ground. electricity means electrical energy. the ground is part of the Earth. 
trees are a source of paper. plants are the source of spices. plants are a source of fibers. a tree is a kind of plant. an (object ; material ; substance) comes from that object or material 's source. paper is a kind of material. spices are a kind of material. fiber is a kind of material. 
soil is a renewable resource for growing plants. a plant is a kind of living thing. a forest is a kind of environment. soil is a kind of nonliving thing. a worm is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. a tree is a kind of plant. a mushroom is a kind of fungus. a fungus is a kind of living thing. soil is usually part of an environment. 
lightning is a kind of electrical discharge. electricity means electrical energy. lightning occurs during lightning storms. 
the cell membrane is the membrane around the cell of all living things. being around something means surrounding that something. a structure of something is synonymous with a part of that something. the cell membrane provides (support ; protection) for a cell. an animal cell is a kind of cell. 
taste is a kind of sense. tea is a kind of beverage. sugar causes food to taste sweet. when an animal eats or drinks something , that animal tastes that something. humans drink beverages. a human is a kind of animal. animals taste flavors. sweet is a kind of flavor. a beverage is a kind of food. 
a mouse is a kind of animal. mice live in in holes in the ground (in fields ; in forests). ground means floor. a deer mouse is a kind of mouse. animals live and feed (in their habitats ; near their habitats). a forest is a kind of environment. habitat is similar to environment. 
melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. an ice cube is a kind of solid. heat is a kind of energy. heat means heat energy. form means kind. 
if (an object ; something) is in the sunlight then (that object ; that something) will absorb solar energy. An example of evaporation is a body of water drying up by absorbing heat energy. a puddle is a kind of body of water. the sun is a source of (radiation ; heat) called sunlight. being in the sun is synonymous with being in the sunlight. (boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. heat means heat energy. if (an object ; a substance) absorbs solar energy then (that object ; that substance) will increase in temperature. adding heat means increasing temperature. a body of water contains water. water is a kind of liquid. 
a pulley is used to lift a flag on a flagpole. a pulley is a kind of simple machine. to lift means to move up. 
shivering is when an animal creates heat by shaking to keep the body warm. (cold temperatures ; cool temperatures) cause animals to shiver. (temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). (cooling ; colder) means (removing ; reducing ; decreasing) (heat ; temperature). temperature drop means cooling. an animal usually requires a warm body temperature for survival. if the (environmental temperature ; air temperature) is too cold then (an animal ; a living thing) in that environment may become cold. if a living thing becomes too cold then that living thing will die. an animal is a kind of living thing. 
shape is a property of an object. the shape of an object can be discovered through (feeling that object ; touching that object). not looking means not seeing. eyes can (sense ; detect) light energy for seeing. eyes are used for seeing by animals by sensing light. reflection is when a wave bounces off a surface and travels in the opposite direction relative to the angle of incidence. the color of an object can be discovered by looking at that object. a student is a kind of human. a human is a kind of animal. to identify means to discover. the eyes are part of the head used for seeing. the head is a part of an animal. 
iron is a kind of metal. metal is an (electrical ; electrical energy) conductor. iron nails are made of iron. An electrical conductor is a vehicle for the flow of electricity. an insulator is the opposite of a conductor. plastic is usually an electrical insulator. a rubber eraser is made of rubber. rubber is an (electrical ; electrical energy ; thermal ; thermal energy) insulator. a wax crayon is made of wax. wax is an (electrical ; electrical energy) insulator. if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. objects are made of (materials ; substances ; matter). conductivity is a property of a (material ; substance). 
mechanical energy is a kind of energy. a pedal is a kind of lever. a lever is a kind of simple machine. a simple machine requires mechanical energy to function. pedalling a bicycle requires moving the pedals in a circular motion. a human can pedal a bicycle. person is synonymous with human. a type is synonymous with a kind. to be used for something means to be required by that something. 
a flashlight emits light. light means light energy. shiny (things ; objects) reflect light. a mirror has a shiny surface. a girl is a kind of animal. eyes are used for seeing by animals by sensing light. light is a kind of wave. reflection is when a wave bounces off a surface and travels in the opposite direction relative to the angle of incidence. to bounce back means to reflect. a mirror is a kind of reflective object. reflection is when light is reflected from (one object ; one place) to (another object ; another place). if an object reflects light toward the eye then that object can be seen. to shine means to emit light. 
windy means high wind speeds. temperature is a property of weather. cold means low in temperature. cloudy means the presence of clouds in the sky. a cloud is a kind of weather. precipitation is a kind of weather. rain is a kind of precipitation. the properties of something are used for describing that something. rainy means often raining. wind speed is a property of weather. 
(animals ; living things) require water for survival. a human is a kind of animal. water is a kind of natural resource. nature is the source of natural resources. nature means a natural environment. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. an (object ; material ; substance) comes from that object or material 's source. water is a kind of substance. 
growing larger is when size increases. growth means (size ; number ; value ; strength) increases. when a plant grows , the (size of ; number of) the leaves of that plant may increase. growing is a kind of process. 
a stove generates heat for cooking usually. a thermometer is used to measure temperature. (boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. temperature is a measure of heat energy. if (a thermal conductor ; an object) is exposed to a source of heat then (that conductor ; that object) may become (hot ; warm). (pot ; pan ; frying pan) is made of metal for cooking. metal is a (thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. heat means heat energy. hot means high in (heat energy ; temperature). (temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). transferring is moving from one place to another place. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. a (pan ; frying pan) is used for cooking food by heating food in it on a stove. being (on something ; placed in something ; placed over something) means touching that something. if (one surface ; one substance ; one object) touches something then one is exposed to that something. 
a plant requires sunlight for photosynthesis. green plants provide food for (themselves ; animals ; consumers) by performing photosynthesis. an plant requires food for survival. sunlight is a kind of solar energy. the sun transfers (solar energy ; light energy ; heat energy) from itself to the (planets ; Earth) through sunlight. the sun is a source of (light ; light energy) called sunlight. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. provide is similar to (give ; make). one can get something from a source. 
a bird is a kind of animal. An example of migration is birds flying south in the winter. migration is when animals move to different locations in an annual cycle. flying is a kind of motion air. motion is when moves (an object ; something) to a direction. annual means once per year. migration is a kind of adaptation. migration is when animals move themselves from a cooler climate to a warmer climate for the winter. winter has cold (temperatures ; weather). winter means (environmental ; outdoor) temperature decreases. a decrease is a kind of change. south is a kind of direction. (temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). migration is a kind of behavior. 
some birds are predators. claws are used to catch prey by some predators. a predator eats other animals for food. a claw sometimes is a part of a predator. predators eat prey. catching something is synonymous with obtaining that something. a structure of something is synonymous with a part of that something. a claw is often part of a bird. prey is a kind of food for predators. the function of something is what that something is used to do. prey is a kind of animal. 
candy is a kind of dessert. desserts usually have less nutrients than other foods. an animal requires enough nutrients to (maintain good health ; survive). a human is a kind of animal. a dessert is a kind of food. (poor health ; bad health ; unhealthy) is the opposite of (good health ; healthy). an animal needs to eat food for nutrients. eating certain foods is a kind of habit. a kind of something is an example of that something. 
fruit contains seeds. a pumpkin contains seeds. a pumpkin is a kind of gourd. a gourd is a kind of fruit. fruit is a part of a (plant ; tree). fruit is a kind of food. 
a decomposer is a kind of living thing. decomposition is when a decomposer breaks down dead organisms. an animal is a kind of organism. a plant is a kind of organism. an organism is a living thing. a decomposer is usually a bacterium or fungus. 
a squirrel is a kind of animal. squirrels gather nuts in the autumn to eat during the winter. if an animal relies on plants for food then that animal must store enough food to last through the winter. usually plants die or become dormant during the winter. An example of preparing is storing something for use later. plants are the source of fruit. nuts are a kind of fruit. winter is a kind of season. An example of a (seasonal change ; adaptation) is plants (dying ; becoming dormant) in the winter. an animal requires enough nutrients to (maintain good health ; survive). an animal needs to eat food for nutrients. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. 
meters ( m ) are a unit used for measuring (length ; distance) generally used for values between 1 and 1000. (meters ; centimeters ; kilometers) are used to (describe distance ; describe length). measuring is used for describing an object. 
a graduated cylinder is a kind of instrument for measuring volume of liquids or objects. water is a kind of liquid. mL means milliliters. milliliters is a kind of unit for measuring volume of liquids. milliliters ( mL ) is a unit used for measuring volume generally used for values between 1 and 1000. a graduated cylinder is used to measure volume (of a liquid ; of an object). 
migration is a kind of adaptation. An example of migration is birds flying south in the winter. migration is when animals move to different locations in an annual cycle. migration is when animals move themselves from a cooler climate to a warmer climate for the winter. a bird is a kind of animal. flying is a kind of motion air. south is a kind of direction. motion is when moves (an object ; something) to a direction. 
electrical conduction is when (metals ; electrical conductors) conduct electricity through (a wire ; electrical conductor ; metal). an insulator is the opposite of a conductor. rubber is an (electrical ; electrical energy ; thermal ; thermal energy) insulator. wood is an (electrical ; electrical energy ; thermal energy) insulator. plastic is usually an electrical insulator. metal is an (electrical ; electrical energy) conductor. if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. conductivity is a property of a (material ; substance). a fork is a kind of object. a good conductor is a conductor. best means most positive. good means positive. 
high temperatures can cause an object to combust. to combust means to catch fire. fire causes burning. fire gives off (light ; heat ; smoke). friction causes the temperature of an object to increase. friction occurs when two object 's surfaces move against each other. a road is a kind of object. a car is a kind of object. a tire is a kind of object. a surface is a part of an object. skidding is a kind of motion. skidding causes speed to decrease. skidding causes friction. braking can cause skidding. a car moves on a road. a tire moves against the road. motion is when moves (an object ; something) to a direction. to give off means to be the source of. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. if something comes from something else then that something else is a source of that something. 
blacktop means asphalt. asphalt is a kind of road surface. a roller skate is a kind of vehicle. a good road has a smooth surface. a wheeled vehicle requires smooth surfaces. sand has a rough surface. gravel is a rough surface. asphalt is a smooth surface. wheels are a part of roller skates. rough is the opposite of smooth. race is when (vehicles ; humans) compete. 
some animals' fur grows thicker for staying warm in the winter. winter is a kind of season. An example of a seasonal change is an animal growing thick fur for keeping warm in the winter. staying warm means keeping warm. 
rest means sleep. rest has a positive impact on a health. a human requires (sleep ; rest) to be healthy. good means positive. rest is a kind of activity. to be required means to be necessary. 
water is a kind of liquid. (boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. boiling is when liquids are heated above their boiling point. adding heat means increasing temperature. heat is a kind of energy. form means kind. 
meters ( m ) are a unit used for measuring (length ; distance) generally used for values between 1 and 1000. kilograms ( kg ) are a unit used for measuring (mass ; weight) generally used for values between 1 and 50000000. liters ( L ) is a unit used for measuring volume generally used for values between 1 and 50000000. degrees celsius ( C ) is a unit used for measuring temperature generally used for values between -273 and 50000000. (meters ; centimeters ; kilometers) are used to (describe distance ; describe length). 
a plant is a kind of living thing. the sun is the source of energy for life on Earth. the sun is the source of energy for physical cycles on Earth. (eating ; taking in) food is used to get (nutrients ; energy) by (animals ; living things). food is a source of energy for (animals ; plants). a plant requires sunlight for photosynthesis. an animal is a kind of living thing. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. green plants provide food for (themselves ; animals ; consumers) by performing photosynthesis. the sun is a source of (light ; light energy) called sunlight. an (animal ; living thing) requires nutrients for survival. life means living things. 
noise means sound. sound is a kind of energy. shaking is a kind of motion. mechanical energy is used to move something by animals. a baby is a kind of young animal. mechanical energy is a kind of energy. (motion ; movement) means (moving ; to move). form means kind. make means produce. converting is similar to producing. to convert means to change. 
rotation is a kind of motion. Earth is a kind of planet. a planet rotating causes cycles of day and night on that planet. the Earth rotates on its axis on its axis. 
daylight is when the sun shines on a location. the amount of daylight is greatest in the summer. the amount of daylight is least in the winter. (New York ; New York State) is a state located in the United States of America. summer is a kind of season. fall is a kind of season. when the seasons change from the summer to the fall , the amount of daylight will decrease. amount of daylight means length of daylight. 
touch is a kind of sense. touching something means feeling that something. feeling is when an living thing senses through touch. texture means how an object feels. the senses are used for making observations. determining often requires (measuring ; observing). 
being stronger usually has a positive impact on an (organism 's ; living thing 's) health. exercise is a kind of physical activity. exercise means physical fitness. good means positive. exercise has a positive impact on a human 's health. exercise increases a body 's strength. strong means high in strength. high is similar to increase. exercising is a kind of habit. a kind of something is an example of that something. 
water is a kind of liquid. freezing means changing from a liquid into a solid by reducing heat energy. 
fruit is a kind of food. an apple is a kind of fruit. (eating ; taking in) food is used to get (nutrients ; energy) by (animals ; living things). an animal needs to eat food for nutrients. taking in something means (receiving ; absorbing ; getting) something. an animal is a kind of organism. . a girl is a kind of (young ; female) human. a human is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. 
a telephone is a kind of electrical device for communication. a telephone is used for communication by humans over long distances. telephones convert sound energy into electrical energy. sound is a kind of sound energy. speaking is a kind of communication. to convert means to change. form means kind. 
eyes can (sense ; detect) light energy for seeing. eyes are used for seeing by animals by sensing light. the eyes are part of the head used for seeing. sight is a kind of sense. sight means to see. reflection is when a wave bounces off a surface and travels in the opposite direction relative to the angle of incidence. light is a kind of wave. a surface is a part of an object. the senses are used for making observations. determining often requires (measuring ; observing). 
green plants are a kind of producer. green plants provide food for (themselves ; animals ; consumers) by performing photosynthesis. photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. providing something means (making ; delivering) something. 
a plant requires soil for (survival ; to grow). plants absorb (nutrients ; water ; oxygen) from soil into themselves through their roots. a (plant ; living thing) requires nutrients to grow. soil contains nutrients for plants. roots anchor plants into the soil. take in means absorb. to anchor means to provide support. roots are a vehicle for absorbing water and nutrients from soil into the plant. absorbing is a kind of function. providing support is a kind of function. 
texture is a property of (surfaces ; materials ; objects) and includes ordered values of (smooth ; rough). taste is a kind of property. hardness is a property of a (material ; an object) and includes ordered values of (malleable ; rigid). a kind of something is an example of that something. 
fur is usually part of a mammal. a rabbit is a kind of animal. a field is a kind of environment. snowy means a large amount of snow. white fur is white in color. snow is white in color. An example of camouflage is when something (is ; has) the same color as its environment. camouflage is a kind of adaptation for hiding in an environment. hiding is a kind of protection (against predators ; from predators). camouflage is a kind of protection (against predators ; from predators ; against consumers). camouflage is used for (protection ; hiding) by (prey ; animals) (against predators ; from predators). a rabbit is a kind of mammal. 
webbed feet are used for moving faster through water by aquatic animals. swimming is when (humans ; animals) can move in water. a duck is a kind of animal. an aquatic animal is a kind of animal. (to help ; to benefit) means to be of use. a duck is a kind of aquatic animal. the function of something is what that something is used to do. 
to drop means to fall. dropping something causes that something to fall. falling means moving downward. downward means down. the bottom is the lowest part of something. low means down. marble is a kind of (object ; material). (gravity ; gravitational force) causes (objects that have mass ; substances) (to be pulled down ; to fall) on a planet. gravity is a kind of force. 
a decomposer is a kind of living thing. decomposition is when a decomposer (recycles ; returns) nutrients from dead organisms to the soil by eating those dead organisms. an organism is a living thing. 
some animals' fur grows thicker for staying warm in the winter. An example of a seasonal change is an animal growing thick fur for keeping warm in the winter. winter is a kind of season. a fox is a kind of animal. An example of a seasonal change is an animal growing thick fur for keeping warm in the winter. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). helping something has a positive impact on that something. staying warm means keeping warm. 
usually people learn how to read and write in school. trait is synonymous with characteristic. inherited characteristics are the opposite of (learned characteristics ; acquired characteristics). inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). 
eye color is an inherited characteristic. inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). blue is a kind of color. 
a cluck is a kind of sound. chickens cluck. loud means high in (sound energy ; sound intensity). a chick is a kind of (young ; baby) chicken. a hen is a kind of female adult chicken. hearing is used for sensing sound by animals. a chicken is a kind of bird. a bird is a kind of animal. (to help ; to benefit) means to be of use. sensing a warning means receiving a warning. 
a balance is a kind of instrument for (measuring mass ; measuring weight). instrument means tool. comparing requires measuring. a balance is used for measuring (mass ; weight) (of an object ; of a substance). a rock is a kind of object. 
crumple means change shape from smooth into (compacted ; irregular) by physical force. shape is a property of an object. a sheet of paper is a kind of object. 
an ice cube is a kind of solid. melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. solid is a kind of state of matter. liquid is a kind of state of matter. 
sinking means moving down. the bottom is the lowest part of something. low means down. marble is a kind of (object ; material). (gravity ; gravitational force) causes (objects that have mass ; substances) (to be pulled down ; to fall) on a planet. pulling is a kind of motion. gravity is a kind of force. 
a microscope is a kind of tool for observing small things. a cell is very small. size is a property of objects and includes ordered values of (microscopic ; tiny ; small ; medium ; large). microscope is used to see (small things ; microscopic things ; specimens) by making them appear bigger. as the size of an object appears larger , that object will (be seen ; be observed) (more easily ; better). helping means something can be (done ; completed) (more easily ; better). a plant cell is a kind of cell. an part of an object is smaller than the entire object. 
an event is a kind of action. weathering means breaking down (rocks ; surface materials) from larger whole into smaller pieces by weather. (rocks ; soil ; materials) interacting with (wind ; moving water) over long periods of time causes weathering. a piece of an object is smaller in size than the whole object. a rock is a kind of object. break down means change from a whole into pieces. weathering is a kind of erosion. erosion is a kind of process. a process is a kind of event. 
ice wedging is when ice causes rocks to crack by expanding in openings. cycles of freezing and thawing water cause ice wedging. cracking something may cause that something to break apart. when water freezes , that water expands. 
greatest means (largest ; highest ; most). the amount of daylight is least in the winter. winter is when a hemisphere is tilted away from the sun. Alaska is a state located in the United States of America. United States is located in the northern hemisphere. the Earth being tilted on its axis causes seasons. the amount of daylight is greatest in the summer. winter is a kind of season. summer is a kind of season. amount is a property of something and includes ordered values of (none ; least ; little ; some ; half ; much ; many ; most ; all). fewer means (lower ; less) in number. 
matter with variable volume and shape (assumes ; expands to fill ; takes) the shape and size of its entire container. air is a kind of gas. Matter in the gas phase has variable shape. Matter in the gas phase has variable volume. (size ; amount) means volume. 
an animal needs to eat food for nutrients. an (animal ; living thing) requires nutrients for survival. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. 
when a body of water receives more water than it can hold , a flood occurs. a stream is a kind of body of water. (storms ; rain) cause bodies of water to increase amount of water they contain. amount of water in a body of water increases by (storms ; rain ; glaciers melting ; snow melting ; ice melting). a thunderstorm is a kind of storm. flooding is a kind of change. 
matter with variable volume and shape (assumes ; expands to fill ; takes) the shape and size of its entire container. air is a kind of gas. Matter in the gas phase has variable shape. Matter in the gas phase has variable volume. expand means spread out. the volume of an object can be used to describe the size of that object. gas is a kind of substance. material means substance. 
Earth 's tilt on its axis causes seasons (to change ; to occur). each season occurs once per year. when the season changes , the amount of daylight will change. the amount of daylight is greatest in the summer. the amount of daylight is least in the winter. period of daylight is synonymous with amount of daylight. length of time means period of time. 
the Sun is the star that is closest to Earth. the sun is a source of (light ; light energy) called sunlight. as a source of light becomes closer , that source will appear brighter. 
(an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). An example of camouflage is when something changes color in order to have the same color as its environment. camouflage is a kind of adaptation for hiding in an environment. the arctic is a kind of environment. helping something has a positive impact on that something. camouflage is used for (protection ; hiding) by (prey ; animals) (against predators ; from predators). an animal is a kind of organism. fur is often part of an animal. color is a property of (an object ; a material). characteristic means property. if an animal 's fur is a color then that animal is that color. protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). an organism is a living thing. 
shape is a property of an object. classifying means grouping (objects ; materials) by their properties. a leaf is a kind of object. classifying is a kind of science process. grouping means (putting ; placing) in different groups. 
the Sun is the star that is closest to Earth. the sun is a source of (light ; light energy) called sunlight. far is the opposite of close. the stars in the night sky are very far away from the Earth. as a source of light becomes closer , that source will appear brighter. 
the gravitational pull of the Moon on Earth 's oceans causes the tides. causing means influencing. 
eye color is an inherited characteristic. blue is a kind of color. the colors of the parts of an organism are inherited characteristics. eyes are usually part of an animal for seeing. an animal is a kind of organism. inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). genes are a vehicle for passing inherited characteristics from parent to offspring. offspring receive genes from their parents through (inheritence ; DNA). person is synonymous with human. a human is a kind of animal. 
the winter solstice is on December 21st in the northern hemisphere. the amount of daylight is least on the winter solstice. December is during the winter in the northern hemisphere. the amount of daylight is least in the winter. daylight means sunlight. The North Pole is located in the northern hemisphere. the North Pole is a kind of location. intensity of sunlight is similar to amount of sunlight. less is similar to decrease. as the distance of a location from the North Pole becomes (smaller ; closer) , the amount of daylight received by that location will decrease during the winter. 
greatest means (largest ; highest ; most). Earth is the planet that is third closest to the Sun. Pluto is the planet that is ninth closest to the Sun. the sun is a source of (light ; light energy) called sunlight. as distance to an object increases , that object will appear smaller. a star is a kind of (celestial object ; celestial body). the Sun is a kind of star. dimmer is the opposite of brighter. how something appears is how that something looks. far means great in distance. increase means more. as a source of light becomes closer , that source will appear brighter. 
a sunny day has lots of sunlight. a cloudy day has little sunlight. amount is a property of something and includes ordered values of (none ; least ; little ; some ; half ; much ; many ; most ; all). lots means much. as the amount of light decreases , the difficulty to see shadows will increase. lower means less. to lower means to decrease. increase means more. 
as altitude increases , the temperature of the air will decrease. moisture means (liquid ; liquid water). climbing increases altitude. (colder ; cooler) means lower in temperature. (cooling ; colder) means (removing ; reducing ; decreasing) (heat ; temperature). freezing means changing from a liquid into a solid by reducing heat energy. heat means heat energy. ice is a kind of solid. ice crystals means ice. water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). freezing causes a solid to form. to lower means to decrease. high means great in altitude. greater means (higher ; more) in value. increase means more. 
an animal requires oxygen for (survival ; to breathe). a fish is a kind of animal. gills are a part of a fish used for breathing water. breathing is when a gill converts from oxygen in water into oxygen in blood. water contains dissolved oxygen. take in oxygen means get oxygen into the blood. requiring is similar to needing help. 
condensing means changing from a gas into a liquid by reducing heat energy. cold means low in temperature. (temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). dew is a kind of liquid. condensing is when gasses are cooled below their boiling point. water vapor cooling causes that water vapor to condense. (cooling ; colder) means (removing ; reducing ; decreasing) (heat ; temperature). water is in the gas state , called water vapor , for temperatures between (373 ; 212 ; 100) and 100000000000 (K ; F ; C). condensing causes a liquid to form. dew is formed when water vapor (condenses ; cools) over night. 
the Earth rotating on its axis causes the sun to appear to move across the sky during the day. the sun rises in the east. the sun sets in the west. rising is a kind of motion. setting is a kind of motion. if a human is on a rotating planet then other celestial bodies will appear to move from that human 's perspective. Earth is a kind of planet. the Sun is a kind of star. a star is a kind of (celestial object ; celestial body). the Earth rotates on its axis on its axis. 
a guitar is a kind of musical instrument. musical instruments make sound when they are played. sound is a kind of air vibration. a pebble is a kind of small rock. a rock is a kind of object. dropping an object into water causes vibrations in the water. a drum is a kind of musical instrument. playing a drum means (banging ; hitting) a drum. 
butter is a kind of solid below 32 degrees celsius. melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. melting is when solids are heated above their melting point. if (a thermal conductor ; an object) is exposed to a source of heat then (that conductor ; that object) may become (hot ; warm). a (hot ; warm) something is a source of heat. if (one surface ; one substance ; one object) touches something then one is exposed to that something. being (on something ; placed in something ; placed over something) means touching that something. butter is a kind of substance. (pot ; pan ; frying pan) is made of metal for cooking. metal is a (thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. conductivity is a property of a (material ; substance). metal is a kind of material. if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. a (pan ; frying pan) is a kind of container for (cooking ; food). a container is a kind of object. heating means adding heat. heat means heat energy. 
the sun is a source of (light ; light energy) called sunlight. water absorbs light energy. if (an object ; a substance) absorbs solar energy then (that object ; that substance) will increase in temperature. solar energy is a kind of light. light means light energy. (warm ; becoming warm) means heat is added. adding heat means increasing temperature. water is a kind of substance. 
the Sun is a kind of star. stars are some of the hottest objects. a star is a kind of (celestial object ; celestial body). if an object is hot then the surfaces of that object are hot. a surface is a part of an object. 
decomposition is when a decomposer breaks down dead organisms. a decomposer is usually a bacterium or fungus. a decomposer is a kind of living thing. a plant is a kind of organism. an animal is a kind of organism. In the food chain process bacteria have the role of decomposer. 
a plant is a kind of living thing. a water lily is a kind of green plant. green plants provide food for (themselves ; animals ; consumers) by performing photosynthesis. a plant requires sunlight for photosynthesis. photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. provide is similar to (give ; make). sunlight means solar energy. to be used for something means to be required by that something. 
a forest environment is often green in color. green is a kind of color. a tree frog is a kind of animal. coloration is a kind of adaptation for (hiding ; camouflage). hiding means (visibility ; ability to be seen) decreases for camouflage. a forest contains (plants ; trees). a leaf is a part of a green plant. a forest is a kind of environment. a leaf is often green in color. coloration means a thing 's color. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). helping something has a positive impact on that something. camouflage is a kind of adaptation for hiding in an environment. as the ability to do something decreases , doing that something will be harder. 
jet streams may deflect the air masses moved by the prevailing westerlies. the prevailing westerlies move air masses from east to west across the United States. 
transpiration usually happens in the leaves of a plant. transpiration is when water vapor moves from (plants ; leaves) into the atmosphere. plants control the amount of water in their leaves through transpiration. transpiration is a kind of process. 
August is during the winter in the southern hemisphere. August is a kind of month. winter is a kind of season. 
the shape of body parts is an inherited characteristic. a nose is a part of a body. trait is synonymous with characteristic. 
high pressure systems cause clear weather. clear weather means (sunny ; not cloudy ; not rainy) weather. weather is a property of a environment. an environment means an area. 
a force continually acting on an object in the same direction that the object is moving can cause that object 's speed to increase in a forward motion. 
combustion is a kind of chemical change. chemical reactions cause (new substances ; different substances) to form. fire causes burning. to combust means to catch fire. chemical reactions cause chemical change. a kind of something is an example of that something. 
friction acts to counter the motion of two objects when their surfaces are touching. a surface is a part of an object. a wagon is a kind of vehicle. counter means (reduce ; stop ; resist). riding something is to move that thing over a surface. riding is a kind of motion. humans ride vehicles. a child is a kind of young human. if one surface is (moved against ; moved over ; moved down) another surface then those surfaces are touching. (motion ; movement) means (moving ; to move). a vehicle is a kind of object. friction causes the speed of an object to decrease. (stop ; stopped) means (zero ; 0 ; no) speed. 
metal is a (thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. heat energy is synonymous with thermal energy. metal is a kind of material. thermal conduction is when materials conduct heat through those materials. if (a thermal conductor ; an object) is exposed to a source of heat then (that conductor ; that object) may become (hot ; warm). a stove generates heat for cooking usually. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. heating means adding heat. heat means heat energy. if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. conductivity is a property of a (material ; substance). (pot ; pan ; frying pan) is made of metal for cooking. a pot is a kind of container. a container is a kind of object. conduction is a kind of process. 
a single-celled organism is a kind of living thing. a multicellular organism is a kind of living thing. all living things eliminate waste. get rid of means (eliminate ; remove). a function is a kind of characteristic. removing waste is a kind of function. get rid of means (eliminate ; remove). 
as population of prey decreases , the population of predators will decrease. predators eat prey. a predator is a kind of animal. an (animal ; living thing) requires nutrients for survival. . harming an animal species causes that animal 's population to decrease. survive means live. (nonliving ; non-living ; die) is the opposite of (living ; alive ; live). survival means to survive. if an organism eats something then that something is a source of frood to that organism. an animal is a kind of organism. an organism is a living thing. the decrease of something required by an organism has a negative impact on that organism 's survival. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. 
as the temperature of an object increases , the size of that object will increase. length is a part of size. heat means temperature increases. railroad tracks are a kind of object. 
a skeletal system is a part of an animal for (providing support ; providing shape ; providing protection). skeletal system is made of bones. a human is a kind of animal. a skeletal system is a part of an animal. the skeletal system protects internal organs. bone is hard. (something hard ; something strong) can be used for protection. 
(boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. condensing means changing from a gas into a liquid by reducing heat energy. adding something is a kind of change. reducing is a kind of change. 
oceans cover 70% of the surface of the earth. 
if fossils of a water animal or plant are found in a place then that place used to be covered by water in the past. if fossils of a water animal or plant are found in a place then that animal or plant used to live in that place. an ocean is a kind of body of water. fossil means preserved remains of organisms. an animal is a kind of organism. coral is a kind of aquatic animal. coral lives in the (ocean ; warm water). usually coral lives in warm water. sea means ocean. an aquatic animal is a kind of animal. aquatic animal means water animal. a body of water is a kind of environment. tropical environments usually have warm temperatures. 
friction causes the temperature of an object to increase. a block is a kind of object. characteristic means property. (temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). friction occurs when two object 's surfaces move against each other. an object being pushed across another object causes their surfaces to move against each other. a sheet of sandpaper is a kind of object. 
shape is a property of the appearance of an object. if something undergoes physical change then the chemical properties of that something will remain unchanged. material composition is a kind of chemical property. changed is the opposite of unchanged. composed of means made of. if something undergoes a physical change then the physical properties of that something will change. appearance is sometimes a physical property. sharpening an object causes that object to change shape. a pencil is a kind of object. tearing an object changes that object 's shape. a paper is a kind of object. 
earthworms create tunnels in soil. tunnels in soil loosen that soil. the looseness of soil has a positive impact on a plant 's roots' growth in that soil. helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
(to slow ; to slow down) decreases speed. friction causes the speed of an object to decrease. friction is a kind of force. a block is a kind of object. friction acts to counter the motion of two objects when their surfaces are touching. counter means (reduce ; stop ; resist). to reduce means to decrease. a surface is a part of an object. a ramp is a kind of object. if one surface is (moved against ; moved over ; moved down) another surface then those surfaces are touching. sliding is a kind of movement. 
the Sun is the star that is closest to Earth. the stars in the night sky are very far away from the Earth. far is the opposite of close. small is the opposite of large. as distance from an object decreases , that object will appear larger. distance is a property of space and includes ordered values of (close ; far). close means low in distance. low is similar to decrease. 
reproduction is a stage in the life cycle process. when pollen sticks to a hummingbird , that pollen will move to where the hummingbird moves. pollen is part of a flower for reproduction. pollination is a kind of process for plant reproduction. pollination is when (pollinating animals ; wind ; water) carry pollen from one flower to another flower. A bird is a pollinating animal. a hummingbird is a kind of bird. to carry means to move something. 
igneous is a kind of rock. (igneous rocks ; minerals) are formed from (magma ; lava) cooling. a type is synonymous with a kind. 
a complete revolution of the Earth around the sun takes (1 ; one) (year ; solar year ; Earth year). a revolution is when something revolves around something else. revolving around something means orbiting that something. 
hardness is a property of a (material ; an object) and includes ordered values of (malleable ; rigid). marble is a kind of (object ; material). different materials usually have different properties. different is the opposite of the same. objects are made of (materials ; substances ; matter). a statue is a kind of object. a table is a kind of object. marble is a kind of (object ; material). 
a frog is a kind of aquatic animal. aquatic animal means water animal. a pond is a kind of body of water. drying means (amount of water ; amount of liquid ; wetness) decreases. drought means available water decreases in an environment. aquatic (animals ; plants) live in bodies of water. animals live and feed (in their habitats ; near their habitats). if an (animal 's ; organisms) habitat (no longer exists ; ceases to exist) then (that animal ; that organism) will die. to impact means to affect. death means to die. killing means harming something causing death. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. an environment means an area. if a body of water loses all water then that body of water does not exist any more. drying up means losing all water. 
a mineral usually has a crystal structure. a mineral is a kind of (solid ; natural) material. structure is a property of (an object ; a material ; a substance). the properties of something are used for describing that something. 
wind is a renewable resource. solar energy is a renewable resource. sunlight is a kind of solar energy. 
a cactus spine is a part of a cactus for protecting the cactus from animals. protecting something means preventing harm to that something. killing means changing a living thing from alive to dead by harming. dead means not alive. live means to be alive. survive means live. 
a vehicle inspection is when a person examines a vehicle for (safety ; pollution standards). many vehicles emit pollution into the air. pollution is a source of pollutants. to emit means to release. a pollutions standard is a kind of standard for reducing pollutants emitted (by vehicles ; by factories). pollution has a negative impact on the (environment ; air quality). to reduce means to decrease. less is similar to decrease. fewer means (lower ; less) in number. 
skills are learned characteristics. a behavior is a kind of characteristic. cooking is a kind of skill for preparing food. 
creating paper requires cutting down trees. cutting down trees has a negative impact on an (ecosystem ; organisms living in an ecosystem). negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. impact means effect. recycling reduces the resources needed to make something. to reduce means to decrease. if an amount of objects decreases then those objects are fewer in number. trees are a kind of resource. to create means to make. 
solar energy is a renewable resource. a solar panel converts sunlight into electricity. sunlight is a kind of solar energy. an energy source is a kind of resource. resources sometimes are used for energy. 
melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. snow is a kind of ice. water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). warm means medium (heat energy ; temperature). heating means adding heat. melting is a kind of process. 
combining two substances chemically causes chemical reactions. chemical reactions cause (new substances ; different substances) to form. baking soda can react chemically with vinegar. 
if something undergoes physical change then the chemical properties of that something will remain unchanged. salt is a kind of substance. sugar is a kind of substance. 
chemical reactions cause chemical change. adding heat to an object sometimes causes chemical reactions. popping popcorn requires adding heat. if an object undergoes chemical change then that object will have new chemical properties. to cause means to result in. 
a kidney is a kind of organ in an animal. the kidney (removes ; filters) (cell waste ; byproducts) from the blood. 
if electricity flows along more than one pathway then the circuit is parallel. 
an electron microscope creates a picture. an atom is exceptionally small in size. a molecule is exceptionally small in size. a microscope is a kind of tool for observing small things. microscope is used to see (small things ; microscopic things ; specimens) by making them appear bigger. instrument means tool. take a picture means create a picture. an electron microscope is used for seeing very small objects by making them appear bigger. an atom is a kind of object. a molecule is a kind of object. 
when a hurricane moves over land , that hurricane will decrease in strength. a continent is a kind of large land mass. 
a plant 's roots slowly break down rocks as the roots grow. to break down means to break into smaller pieces. 
(rocks ; soil ; materials) interacting with (wind ; moving water) over long periods of time causes weathering. rain is a kind of water. a mountain is made of (rocks ; soil). weathering means breaking down (rocks ; surface materials) from larger whole into smaller pieces by weather. shorter means (smaller ; less) in height. 
a cell wall is a part of a plant cell for supporting and protecting the cell membrane. a pine tree is a kind of tree. a tree is a kind of plant. a plant is a kind of organism. a plant is made of plant cells. 
erosion of soil has a negative impact on the (environment ; soil quality). soil erosion is when (wind ; moving water ; gravity) move soil from (fields ; environments). to wash away is a kind of movement by moving water. In the erosion process roots of plants are an inhibitor. to inhibit means to prevent. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. best means most positive. a tree is a kind of plant. roots are a part of a (plant ; tree). 
hot means high in (heat energy ; temperature). absorbing sunlight causes objects to heat. if (an object ; something) is in the sunlight then (that object ; that something) will absorb solar energy. warm means medium (heat energy ; temperature). if (an object ; a substance) absorbs solar energy then (that object ; that substance) will increase in temperature. clear weather means (sunny ; not cloudy ; not rainy) weather. a sunny day has lots of sunlight. if something is outside during the day then that something will receive sunlight. the sidewalk is a kind of object. a sidewalk is located outside. heating means adding heat. adding heat means increasing temperature. 
cycles of freezing and thawing water cause ice wedging. ice wedging is when ice causes rocks to crack by expanding in openings. cracking something may cause that something to break apart. a crack is a kind of opening. 
a kazoo is a kind of musical instrument. musical instruments make sound when they are played. sound is a kind of air vibration. (matter ; molecules) vibrating can cause sound. matter is made of molecules. objects are made of (materials ; substances ; matter). a musical instrument is a kind of object. 
a rough surface is a part of sandpaper. a sheet of sandpaper is a kind of object. texture means how an object feels. texture is a property of (surfaces ; materials ; objects) and includes ordered values of (smooth ; rough). a surface is a part of an object. 
water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). hail is a kind of (precipitation ; ice). 
humans changing (ecosystems ; environments) usually has a negative impact on an (ecosystem ; organisms living in an ecosystem). humans building homes (in an ecosystem ; in an environment) causes (that ecosystem ; that environment) to change. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. a wetland is a kind of ecosystem. 
speed is a measure of distance travelled (over time ; divided by time). a stopwatch is used to measure time. determining often requires (measuring ; observing). moving is similar to travelling. walking is a kind of motion. (motion ; movement) means (moving ; to move). a stopwatch is a kind of tool for measuring time. a meter stick is used to measure (distance ; height ; length). a meter stick is a kind of tool for (measuring length ; measuring distance). 
forest is synonymous with wooded area. removing forests means removing animal habitats. clearing is similar to removing. if a habitat is removed then that habitat is destroyed. 
a hurricane has high wind speeds. a tornado has high wind speeds. 
a dog is a kind of animal. a human is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. panting is when an animal hangs its tongue out of its mouth to adjust to hot temperatures. sweat is used for adjusting to hot temperatures by some animals. 
longest means greatest in length. (New York ; New York State) is a state located in the United States of America. United States is located in the northern hemisphere. the amount of daylight is greatest in the summer. June is during the summer in the northern hemisphere. the summer solstice is on June 21st in the northern hemisphere. the amount of daylight is greatest on the summer solstice. June is a kind of month. period of daylight is synonymous with amount of daylight. amount of daylight means length of daylight. 
shivering is when an animal creates heat by shaking to keep the body warm. (temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). (cold temperatures ; cool temperatures) cause animals to shiver. to a human a (air ; environment) temperature of 32 F to 50 F is considered cold. a human is a kind of animal. person is synonymous with human. an animal usually requires a warm body temperature for survival. if a living thing becomes too cold then that living thing will die. an animal is a kind of living thing. if the (environmental temperature ; air temperature) is too cold then (an animal ; a living thing) in that environment may become cold. 
cutting down trees has a negative impact on an (ecosystem ; organisms living in an ecosystem). a forest is a kind of ecosystem. a rain forest is a kind of forest. a forest contains (plants ; trees). cutting down a forest means cutting down the trees in that forest. an ecosystem contains (a large community of ; large numbers of) living organisms in a particular place. an environment is similar to an ecosystem. humans changing (ecosystems ; environments) usually has a negative impact on an (ecosystem ; organisms living in an ecosystem). harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. logging is when humans cut down (trees ; forests) for wood. 
water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). water is in the gas state , called water vapor , for temperatures between (373 ; 212 ; 100) and 100000000000 (K ; F ; C). humidity is the amount of (water vapor ; moisture) (in the air ; in the atmosphere). water is a kind of liquid. water is a kind of natural resource. natural resources are found in nature. ice is found in arctic environments. nature means a natural environment. the atmosphere is a part of (nature ; the environment). a body of water contains water. a body of water is a kind of environment. water is a kind of substance. 
as the roughness of something increases , the friction of that something will increase when its surface moves against another surface. as the smoothness of something increases , the friction of that something will decrease when its surface moves against another surface. friction acts to counter the motion of two objects when their surfaces are touching. a road is a kind of object. a surface is a part of an object. riding something is to move that thing over a surface. friction causes the speed of an object to decrease. faster means (an increase ; higher) in speed. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. a student is a kind of human. a bicycle is a kind of vehicle. humans ride vehicles. (motion ; movement) means (moving ; to move). if one surface is (moved against ; moved over ; moved down) another surface then those surfaces are touching. a vehicle is a kind of object. 
some animals' fur grows thicker for staying warm in the winter. staying warm has a positive impact on an animal 's (survival ; health). winter has cold (temperatures ; weather). a bear is a kind of animal. a structure of something is synonymous with a part of that something. fur is often part of an animal. an animal usually requires a warm body temperature for survival. if a living thing becomes too cold then that living thing will die. if the (environmental temperature ; air temperature) is too cold then (an animal ; a living thing) in that environment may become cold. an animal is a kind of living thing. 
a decomposer is a kind of living thing. decomposition is when a decomposer (recycles ; returns) nutrients from dead organisms to the soil by eating those dead organisms. if some nutrients are in the soil then those nutrients are in the food chain. an animal is a kind of organism. a plant is a kind of organism. an organism is a living thing. if a living thing dies then that living thing is dead. 
shortest means (least ; smallest) in length. the winter solstice is on December 21st in the northern hemisphere. the amount of daylight is least on the winter solstice. United States is located in the northern hemisphere. December is during the winter in the northern hemisphere. the amount of daylight is least in the winter. december is a kind of month. period of daylight is synonymous with amount of daylight. amount of daylight means length of daylight. 
a puppy is a (young ; baby) dog. the (color of ; coloration of) fur is an inherited characteristic. spotted is a kind of color pattern. coloration means a pattern of colors. inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). a baby is the offspring of a parent. the colors of the parts of an organism are inherited characteristics. a dog is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. an organism is a living thing. fur is often part of an animal. 
protecting something means preventing harm to that something. a plant is a kind of living thing. if a living thing becomes too cold then that living thing will die. if the (environmental temperature ; air temperature) is too cold then (an animal ; a living thing) in that environment may become cold. protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). freezing means cold temperatures. covering something is a kind of protection. cold temperatures usually have a negative impact on organisms. a plant is a kind of organism. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. 
a fish is a kind of animal. scales are used for protection by scaled animals. a scale is a part of a fish. (something hard ; something strong) can be used for protection. a scale is hard. scales are found on the skin of scaled animals. a fish is a kind of scaled animal. protecting is a kind of function. 
(boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. boiling is when liquids are heated above their boiling point. water is a kind of liquid. boiling means the volume of a liquid decreases. 
a graduated cylinder is used to measure volume (of a liquid ; of an object). a graduated cylinder is a kind of instrument for measuring volume of liquids or objects. liters ( L ) is a unit used for measuring volume generally used for values between 1 and 50000000. 
(meters ; centimeters ; kilometers) are used to (describe distance ; describe length). a centimeter is a kind of unit of measurement. a centimeter is used for measuring (short lengths ; short distances). a desk is usually short (in height ; in width). a desk usually has a length with values between 50 and 250 cm. centimeters ( cm ) are a unit used for measuring (length ; distance) generally used for values between 1 and 250. 
soil erosion means soil loss through (wind ; water ; animals). soil erosion is when (wind ; moving water ; gravity) move soil from (fields ; environments). 
(animals ; living things) require water for survival. an animal requires air for survival. an animal needs to eat food for nutrients. an (animal ; living thing) requires nutrients for survival. 
a rabbit is a kind of animal. winter is a kind of season. winter is a part of the year. some animals' fur grows thicker for staying warm in the winter. An example of a seasonal change is an animal growing thick fur for keeping warm in the winter. an animal requires warmth for survival. 
coloration is used to find a mate by some animals. attract a mate means find a mate. coloration is a kind of adaptation for (hiding ; camouflage). coloration means a thing 's color. 
a telescope is used for observing (stars ; planets ; moons ; distant objects ; the sky ; celestial objects). a telescope is a kind of instrument for (observing celestial objects ; observing the sky). instrument means tool. a computer is used for (communication ; finding information). communicating means sharing information. to observe means to gather information. a computer is a kind of tool. 
a landslide is when (water ; gravity) rapidly moves rocks or soil downhill especially after a rain storm. landslides often occur on mountains. rainstorm means rain storm. a landslide is a kind of natural event. 
creating paper requires cutting down trees. cutting down trees has a negative impact on an (ecosystem ; organisms living in an ecosystem). impact means effect. using an object often requires creating that object. if something has a negative impact on something else then increasing the amount of that something has a negative impact on that something else. amount is similar to number. 
a moose is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. a plant is a kind of living thing. green plants provide food for (themselves ; animals ; consumers) by performing photosynthesis. (eating ; taking in) food is used to get (nutrients ; energy) by (animals ; living things). an (animal ; living thing) requires nutrients for survival. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. 
(matter ; materials ; substances) are made of (atoms ; particles). air is a kind of matter. 
(sand dunes ; arches) are formed by the wind transporting and depositing sand. to cause the formation of means to form. to cause means to be responsible for. 
a reflector is used to reflect light especially on vehicles. reflecting (light ; sound) is the opposite of absorbing (light ; sound). to bounce back means to reflect. reflection is when a wave bounces off a surface and travels in the opposite direction relative to the angle of incidence. light is a kind of wave. 
live birth means developing inside the mother instead of an egg. mammals (birth ; give birth to) live young. a mother births offspring. a cat is a kind of mammal. a mammal is a kind of animal. 
the (lunar surface ; moon 's surface) contains many craters. usually (craters on planets ; craters on moons) are formed by (asteroids ; meteoroids) impacting that planet or moon 's surface. 
thunder is a kind of sound. thunder is loud. thunder occurs during thunderstorms. sound waves means sound energy. intense sound energy can move objects. rattle is a kind of motion. a window is a kind of object. loud means high in (sound energy ; sound intensity). intense means high in intensity. 
preferences are generally learned characteristics. a dog is a kind of animal. a food preference is a kind of preference. the (color of ; coloration of) fur is an inherited characteristic. the shape of body parts is an inherited characteristic. an ear is a kind of body part. length is a property of the shape of an object. an organism 's environment affects that organism 's acquired characteristics. an animal is a kind of organism. a learned characteristic is a kind of acquired characteristic. to cause means to result in. to cause means to have an effect. to impact means to affect. impact means effect. 
(hawks ; eagles) eat (snakes ; lizards). predators eat prey. as population of predators decreases , the population of prey will increase in an environment. an eagle is a kind of animal. a snake is a kind of animal. if the population of an organism increases then the ecosystem may become overpopulated with that organism. an environment is similar to an ecosystem. an animal is a kind of organism. 
a lizard is a kind of animal. an insect is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. In the food chain process an animal has the role of consumer which eats (producers ; other animals) for food. lizards eat insects. (hawks ; eagles) eat (snakes ; lizards). if an animal eats another animal then that animal is a carnivore or omnivore or predator. predators eat prey. as population of prey decreases , the population of predators will decrease. both means two. a hawk is a kind of animal. harming an animal species causes that animal 's population to decrease. killing means harming something causing death. 
decomposition is when a decomposer breaks down dead organisms. decomposition is when a decomposer (recycles ; returns) nutrients from dead organisms to the soil by eating those dead organisms. a mushroom is a kind of fungus. a decomposer is usually a bacterium or fungus. a kind of something is an example of that something. In the food chain process fungi have the role of decomposer. 
falling means moving downward. downward means down. the floor is at the bottom of a room. the bottom is the lowest part of something. low means down. a pencil is a kind of object. (gravity ; gravitational force) causes (objects that have mass ; substances) (to be pulled down ; to fall) on a planet. pulling is a kind of motion. motion is when moves (an object ; something) to a direction. 
if an object is close then that object will appear large. the Sun is the star that is closest to Earth. the stars in the night sky are very far away from the Earth. far is the opposite of close. 
snowing is when snow fall from clouds to the (Earth ; ground). snow is a kind of precipitation. precipitation is when (rain ; snow ; hail) fall from clouds to the (Earth ; ground). grey clouds are a source of precipitation. grey clouds appear before precipitation. a cloud is a kind of weather. 
a plant stem is the vehicle for transporting water and food from roots to the rest of the plant. transporting is a kind of function. to carry means to transport. 
An example of an instinctive behavior is a baby bird pecking at its shell to hatch. a chick is a kind of (young ; baby) chicken. a chicken is a kind of bird. an animal knows how to do instinctive behaviors when it is born. if an animal hatches from an egg then that animal is born. a bird is a kind of animal. 
a freezer is used for cooling things. (temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). (cooling ; colder) means (removing ; reducing ; decreasing) (heat ; temperature). take away means decreasing. freezing means changing from a liquid into a solid by reducing heat energy. water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). water is a kind of liquid. 
if an object is black then that object absorbs all (visible light ; heat). a paper is a kind of object. amount is a property of something and includes ordered values of (none ; least ; little ; some ; half ; much ; many ; most ; all). 
sound is a kind of energy. sound is a kind of air vibration. sound can travel through air. form means kind. 
cycles of freezing and thawing water cause ice wedging. ice wedging is when ice causes rocks to crack by expanding in openings. water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). freezing means changing from a liquid into a solid by reducing heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. to cause means to make. a crack is a kind of opening. when water freezes , that water expands. 
a sand dune is a kind of land formation. (sand dunes ; arches) are formed by the wind transporting and depositing sand. an arch is a kind of land formation. wind causes erosion. soil erosion means soil loss through (wind ; water ; animals). to form means to create. 
an anemometer is a kind of instrument for measuring wind speed. an anemometer is used to measure wind speed. 
if fossils of a water animal or plant are found in a place then that place used to be covered by water in the past. if fossils of a water animal or plant are found in a place then that animal or plant used to live in that place. an ocean is a kind of body of water. the Grand Canyon is a kind of canyon. a canyon is a kind of place. fossil means preserved remains of organisms. an animal is a kind of organism. 
(rocks ; soil ; materials) interacting with (wind ; moving water) over long periods of time causes weathering. weathering is a kind of process. weathering means breaking down (rocks ; surface materials) from larger whole into smaller pieces by weather. a canyon is made of rocks. breaking down is a kind of forming. most canyons are formed by flowing rivers through erosion over long periods of time. a river is a kind of flowing body of water. flowing is a kind of motion. weathering is a kind of erosion. 
(boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. (temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). a sunny day has lots of sunlight. sunlight produces heat. heat means heat energy. if (an object ; something) is in the sunlight then (that object ; that something) will absorb solar energy. if (an object ; a substance) absorbs solar energy then (that object ; that substance) will increase in temperature. if something is outside during the day then that something will receive sunlight. temperature is a measure of heat energy. to add means to increase. to receive sunlight means to absorb sunlight. sunlight is a kind of solar energy. evaporation is a kind of process. 
(mass ; weight) is a property of (matter ; objects ; materials). volume is a property of matter. the properties of something are used for describing that something. 
a forest is a kind of environment. coloration is a kind of adaptation for (hiding ; camouflage). coloration means a thing 's color. fur is often part of an animal. a bear is a kind of animal. camouflage is a kind of adaptation for hiding in an environment. camouflage is used for (protection ; hiding) by (prey ; animals) (against predators ; from predators). An example of camouflage is when something (is ; has) the same color as its environment. helping something has a positive impact on that something. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). dark means dark in color. a dense forest environment is often dark in color. 
a complete revolution of the Earth around the sun takes (1 ; one) (year ; solar year ; Earth year). 
a baby is the offspring of a parent. a puppy is a (young ; baby) dog. eye color is an inherited characteristic. a dog is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. the colors of the parts of an organism are inherited characteristics. the (color of ; coloration of) fur is an inherited characteristic. eyes are usually part of an animal for seeing. fur is often part of an animal. brown is a kind of color. black is a kind of color. trait is synonymous with characteristic. inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). 
carbon dioxide is a kind of gas. photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. green plants are a kind of producer. In the photosynthesis process (carbon dioxide ; water ; sunlight) has the role of raw material. if something is a raw material in a process then that something is required for that process. to be used for something means to be required by that something. 
some lizards live in desert habitats. a horned lizard is a kind of lizard. a lizard is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. organisms are a part of an environment. an animal is a kind of organism. a component means a part of. a desert is a kind of environment. 
an incandescent light bulb converts electricity into (light ; heat) by sending electricity through a filament. heat means heat energy. light means light energy. electricity means electrical energy. sending electricity through a conductor causes (electricity ; electric current) to flow through that conductor. metal is an (electrical ; electrical energy) conductor. 
carbon dioxide is colorless. CO2 means carbon dioxide. color is a kind of (physical ; visual) property. colorless means no color. 
if (a thermal conductor ; an object) is exposed to a source of heat then (that conductor ; that object) may become (hot ; warm). thermal conduction is when materials conduct heat through those materials. metal is a (thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. (boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. heat means heat energy. if a body part was burned then that body part was exposed to a lot of heat energy. a finger is a part of a hand. a hand is a part of the body. if (one surface ; one substance ; one object) touches something then one is exposed to that something. a (hot ; warm) something is a source of heat. if liquid is boiling then that liquid is hot. soup is a kind of liquid. metal is a kind of material. 
ice cream is a kind of solid. melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. melting is a kind of phase change. heat means heat energy. 
running is a kind of movement. an animal requires energy to move. a dog is a kind of animal. food is a source of energy for (animals ; plants). one can get something from a source. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. 
a leaf performs (photosynthesis ; gas exchange). photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. sugar is a kind of simple carbohydrate. if something performs a task then that task is that something 's function. 
an event is a kind of action. farming is when a human plants crops for food. crops are a kind of edible plant for eating. a (plant ; living thing) requires nutrients to grow. plants absorb (nutrients ; water ; oxygen) from soil into themselves through their roots. soil contains nutrients for plants. (high quality ; rich ; good) soil has a high number of nutrients. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. planting crops requires growing crops. farming is a kind of process. a process is a kind of event. action means activity. 
oxygen is a kind of gas. plants are a source of oxygen through photosynthesis. to give off means to be the source of. photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. green plants are a kind of producer. 
fruit contains seeds. fruit is a part of a (plant ; tree). an oak is a kind of tree. 
an ice cube is a kind of solid. the sun is a source of (radiation ; heat) called sunlight. sunlight produces heat. melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. melting is when solids are heated above their melting point. heat means heat energy. absorbing sunlight causes objects to heat. if (an object ; something) is in the sunlight then (that object ; that something) will absorb solar energy. make means produce. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. heating means adding heat. melting is a kind of process. a process is a kind of event. 
planting native plants has a positive impact on an ecosystem. to restore means to return to a better state. better means good. good means positive. helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
planting trees is sometimes a human activity. planting trees has a positive impact on an ecosystem. impact means effect. 
predicting weather requires studying weater. storm is a kind of (weather ; weather event). preparing for a storm requires predicting the occurrence of that storm. 
a complete revolution of the Earth around the sun takes (1 ; one) (year ; solar year ; Earth year). 
person is synonymous with human. logging is when humans cut down (trees ; forests) for wood. a forest contains (plants ; trees). cutting down a forest means cutting down the trees in that forest. protecting something means preventing harm to that something. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. good means positive. removing forests means removing animal habitats. if an (animal 's ; organisms) habitat (no longer exists ; ceases to exist) then (that animal ; that organism) will die. killing means changing a living thing from alive to dead by harming. death means to die. some birds live in forests. removing a forest means cutting down a forest. a forest is a kind of environment. an environment is a kind of place. if a living thing dies then that living thing is dead. 
a hand dryer is a kind of electrical device for drying hair. a hand dryer produces heat. heat is a kind of energy. electrical devices convert electricity into other forms of energy. to convert means to change. a device is a kind of object. an object is an item. form means kind. electricity means electrical energy. electrical energy is a kind of energy. 
food is a kind of chemical energy. form means kind. 
if something contains a large amount of magnetic material then that something will attract magnets. a magnet attracts (magnetic metals ; ferromagnetic metals) through magnetism. metal is sometimes magnetic. if something is made of (something ; a material) then that something contains (that something ; that material). metal is a kind of material. 
mechanical energy is a kind of energy. a block is a kind of object. mechanical energy is used to move something by animals. a human is a kind of animal. person is synonymous with human. pushing something can cause that something to move. form means kind. 
eye color is an inherited characteristic. inherited characteristics are the opposite of (learned characteristics ; acquired characteristics). blue is a kind of color. the colors of the parts of an organism are inherited characteristics. eyes are usually part of an animal for seeing. an animal is a kind of organism. 
(gravity ; gravitational force) causes (objects that have mass ; substances) (to be pulled down ; to fall) on a planet. a ball is a kind of object. gravity is a kind of force. 
hail is a kind of (precipitation ; ice). sleet is a kind of precipitation. form means kind. 
heat means heat energy. to reduce means to decrease. temperature is a measure of heat energy. freezing means changing from a liquid into a solid by reducing heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. 
downhill means down. (gravity ; gravitational force) causes (objects that have mass ; substances) (to be pulled down ; to fall) on a planet. a rock is a kind of object. 
exercise has a positive impact on a human 's health. good means positive. if something has a positive impact on health then that something can help to maintain good health. 
humans cause pollution. polluting means (something harmful ; something poisonous) is added to an environment causing harm to the environment. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. humans changing (ecosystems ; environments) usually has a negative impact on an (ecosystem ; organisms living in an ecosystem). polluting is a kind of activity. 
an animal needs to eat food for nutrients. to repair means to heal. an animal requires nutrients to grow and heal. food is a source of energy for (animals ; plants). an animal requires nutrients to grow and heal. one can get something from a source. 
(gravity ; gravitational force) causes (objects that have mass ; substances) (to be pulled down ; to fall) on a planet. a ball is a kind of object. dropping something causes that something to fall. falling means moving downward. downward means down. gravity is a kind of force. 
snow is a kind of precipitation. sleet is a kind of precipitation. hail is a kind of (precipitation ; ice). rain is a kind of precipitation. form means kind. 
a flower produces pollen and seeds. a flower is a part of a plant for (attracting pollinators ; producing seeds). 
a graduated cylinder is a kind of instrument for measuring volume of liquids or objects. instrument means tool. a graduated cylinder is used to measure volume (of a liquid ; of an object). 
the arctic is a kind of environment. white fur is white in color. snow is white in color. arctic animals live in an arctic environment. the arctic environment is white in color from being covered in snow. An example of camouflage is when something (is ; has) the same color as its environment. Camouflage is synonymous with visual disguise. disguise means change appearance to hide. blending in is synonymous with hiding. a fox is a kind of animal. camouflage is a kind of adaptation for hiding in an environment. 
to be used for something means to help to do that something. smell is used for finding food by some animals. a fox is a kind of animal. sense is a kind of characteristic of an animal. smell is a kind of sense. 
(carnivores ; omnivores) are predators. a turtle is a kind of animal. a worm is a kind of animal. an animal needs to eat food for nutrients. (predators ; carnivores ; omnivores) eat other animals. (eating ; digestion) is when an organism takes in nutrients from food into itself by eating. prey is a kind of food for predators. predators eat prey. if an animal eats another animal then that animal is a carnivore or omnivore or predator. a turtle is a kind of omnivore. 
temperature is a property of weather. sky conditions are a property of weather. the properties of something are used for describing that something. 
migration is when animals move to different locations in an annual cycle. flying is a kind of motion air. motion is when moves (an object ; something) to a direction. south is a kind of direction. migration is when animals move themselves from a cooler climate to a warmer climate for the winter. An example of migration is birds flying south in the winter. annual means once per year. winter is a kind of season. each season occurs once per year. 
to be used for something means to help to do that something. a radio is used for communication. a computer is used for (communication ; finding information). communicating means sharing information. a computer is a kind of tool. a radio is a kind of tool. 
dry means low in (amount of water ; wetness ; moisture). (boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. as the temperature of a liquid increases , that liquid will evaporate quicker. warm means warm temperature. the sun causes water to evaporate more quickly by adding heat. water is a kind of liquid. drying means (amount of water ; amount of liquid ; wetness) decreases. a sunny day has lots of sunlight. sunlight produces heat. the sun is a source of (light ; light energy) called sunlight. to lower means to decrease. 
the solar system contains the moon. the moon reflects sunlight towards the Earth. sunlight is a kind of light. a moon is a kind of satellite. a satellite orbits a planet. the moon orbits the Earth. a moon is a kind of celestial (object ; body). 
a rock is a kind of object. (rocks ; soil ; materials) interacting with (wind ; moving water) over long periods of time causes weathering. weathering means breaking down (rocks ; surface materials) from larger whole into smaller pieces by weather. breaking down an object changes that object 's shape and mass. a stream is a kind of body of water. flowing is a kind of motion. 
sound is a kind of air vibration. (matter ; molecules) vibrating can cause sound. air is a vehicle for sound. producing is similar to causing. 
soil erosion is when (wind ; moving water ; gravity) move soil from (fields ; environments). soil erosion is a kind of (slow ; natural) process. sand is similar to soil. An example of movement is washing away. most canyons are formed by flowing rivers through erosion over long periods of time. flowing is similar to pouring. a canyon is made of rocks. weathering is a kind of erosion. weathering means breaking down (rocks ; surface materials) from larger whole into smaller pieces by weather. a river is a kind of flowing body of water. flowing is a kind of motion. to wash away is a kind of movement by moving water. 
objects are made of (materials ; substances ; matter). a rock is a kind of object. a moon is a kind of celestial (object ; body). if two objects are made of similar materials then one of those objects may be formed from material from the other object. a planet is a kind of celestial (object ; body). Earth is a kind of planet. composed of means made of. 
a telescope is used for observing (stars ; planets ; moons ; distant objects ; the sky ; celestial objects). look at means observe. 
trait is synonymous with characteristic. inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). (children ; young) is synonymous with offspring. the shape of body parts is an inherited characteristic. an earlobe is a kind of body part. 
an amoeba is a kind of single-celled organism. a kind of something is an example of that something. 
inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). DNA is a vehicle for passing inherited characteristics from parent to offspring. (children ; young) is synonymous with offspring. resemble means similar characteristics. 
a sea turtle is a kind of animal. a beach is a kind of (habitat ; environment). humans moving into an environment usually causes native species to lose their habitats. humans changing animal habitats usually causes harm to those animals. if an (animal 's ; organisms) habitat (no longer exists ; ceases to exist) then (that animal ; that organism) will die. killing means harming something causing death. harming an animal species causes that animal 's population to decrease. 
a dog is a kind of animal. inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). living things can all reproduce. an animal is a kind of living thing. to reproduce means to have offspring. 
a barometer is a kind of instrument for measuring air pressure. a barometer is used to measure air pressure. air pressure is a property of (air ; the atmosphere). 
a block is a kind of object. if an object is blue then that object reflects only blue light. if an object reflects a light of a certain color then the object appears to be that color. blue is a kind of color. sunlight is a kind of light. 
to eat means to consume food. bees eat pollen. pollen is part of a flower for reproduction. a flower is a part of a plant for (attracting pollinators ; producing seeds). 
a fish lives in water. if fossils of a water animal or plant are found in a place then that place used to be covered by water in the past. if fossils of a water animal or plant are found in a place then that animal or plant used to live in that place. a lake is a kind of body of water. 
electromagnets can be powered by electricity. electricity means electrical energy. ferrous metals contain iron. an electromagnet contains (a wire ; cylindrical ferrous metal). batteries convert chemical energy to electrical energy. rod is cylindrical in shape. made up of means (contains ; made of). made of is similar to is built from. a battery is a source of electrical energy. if something is powered by something else then that something requires a source of that something else. 
weathering means breaking down (rocks ; surface materials) from larger whole into smaller pieces by weather. when something breaks , a crack may form in that something. a boulder is a kind of large rock. cycles of freezing and thawing water cause ice wedging. ice wedging is when ice causes rocks to crack by expanding in openings. winter has cold (temperatures ; weather). spring has warm (temperatures ; weather). cold means low in temperature. warm means medium (heat energy ; temperature). to lower means to decrease. temperature is a measure of heat energy. freezing means changing from a liquid into a solid by reducing heat energy. to reduce means to decrease. thawing is similar to melting. melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. warm is similar to hot. hot means high in (heat energy ; temperature). high is similar to increase. winter is a kind of season. spring is a kind of season. each season occurs once per year. due to means caused by. 
an amphibian is a kind of animal. amphibians hatch from eggs. young amphibians breathe through gills. adult amphibians live on land. classifying is when one sorts something by (kind ; type). to belong to a group means to be classified in that group. 
sedimentary rocks often have different colored layers. sedimentary rocks are formed from sediment (compacting ; cementing) together. sedimentary rocks are made of small particles. 
fog is formed by water vapor condensing in the air. water is in the gas state , called water vapor , for temperatures between (373 ; 212 ; 100) and 100000000000 (K ; F ; C). (boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. an ocean is a kind of body of water. condensing means changing from a gas into a liquid by reducing heat energy. 
refrigerators contain harmful chemicals. a refrigerator is a kind of appliance. often humans discard appliances after using those appliances. if a human discards an object then that object will become waste. humans move waste to a landfill for (disposal ; storage). landfills have a negative impact on the (environment ; communities). 
a ruler is used for measuring the length of an object. size is a property of objects and includes ordered values of (microscopic ; tiny ; small ; medium ; large). a bubble is a kind of object. largest means greatest in size. length is a part of size. 
a microscope is a kind of tool for observing small things. microscope is used to see (small things ; microscopic things ; specimens) by making them appear bigger. (to help ; to benefit) means to be of use. to get a better look at means to see better. look at means observe. 
usually plants store the food they produce for future use. 
water is a kind of natural resource. a lake is a kind of body of water. runoff contains (chemicals ; fertilizer ; pollutants ; pesticides) from cropland. to impact means to affect. cropland is used for farming by humans. pollution is when humans pollute the environment with pollutants. pollution has a negative impact on the (environment ; air quality). a body of water is a kind of environment. 
paper is recyclable. recycling has a positive impact on the environment. recycling reduces the resources needed to make something. creating paper requires cutting down trees. cutting down trees has a negative impact on an (ecosystem ; organisms living in an ecosystem). an environment is similar to an ecosystem. making something requires resources. creating means making. humans changing (ecosystems ; environments) usually has a negative impact on an (ecosystem ; organisms living in an ecosystem). trees are a kind of resource. recyclable means a material can be recycled. 
wood is a renewable resource. a renewable resource is a natural resource. 
hardness is a property of a (material ; an object) and includes ordered values of (malleable ; rigid). ice is a kind of solid. solids are usually hard. 
the Earth rotating on its axis causes the sun to appear to move across the sky during the day. the sun rises in the east. the sun sets in the west. 
metal is usually flexible. flexibility means the shape (of a material ; of an object) can be easily changed. if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. flexibility is a property of a material. a wire is a kind of object. flexible means high flexibility. 
nearly all fossils are found in sedimentary rock. sedimentary is a kind of rock. An example of a fossil is a paw print in rock. 
a (plants ; living things) require water for (survival ; to grow). crops are a kind of edible plant for eating. rain is a kind of precipitation. precipitation is a kind of weather. farming is when a human plants crops for food. drought is when amount of precipitation decreases. rain is a source of water. drought means available water decreases in an environment. loss of resources has a negative impact on the organisms in an area. to impact means to affect. if there is a loss of something then that something decreases. water is a kind of natural resource. crops are a kind of edible plant for eating. a plant is a kind of organism. planting crops is synonymous with growing crops. crops are a kind of edible plant for eating. 
a windmill converts wind energy into electricity. electricity means electrical energy. electricity is used as an energy source by electrical devices. electrical devices are used for (industrial purposes ; household purposes) by humans. (to help ; to benefit) means to be of use. 
metal is a kind of material. if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. conductivity is a property of a (material ; substance). metal is a (thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. a spoon is a kind of object. if (a thermal conductor ; an object) is exposed to a source of heat then (that conductor ; that object) may become (hot ; warm). a (hot ; warm) something is a source of heat. an object is an item. 
acid rain has a negative impact on water quality. having an impact on something means altering that something. a human is a kind of animal. (animals ; living things) require water for survival. impact means effect. 
fertile soil is high in quality. a plant requires soil for (survival ; to grow). farming is when a human plants crops for food. crops are a kind of edible plant for eating. soil contains nutrients for plants. (high quality ; rich ; good) soil has a high number of nutrients. farming happens on a farm. soil is a renewable resource for growing plants. 
shedding is when an animal loses (hair ; fur ; skin). a hare is similar to a rabbit. some rabbits live in forests. a rabbit is a kind of animal. a forest contains (plants ; trees). bark is a protective covering around the (trunk of ; branches of) a tree. bark is usually brown in color. snow is white in color. An example of camouflage is when something changes color in order to have the same color as its environment. coloration is a kind of adaptation for (hiding ; camouflage). coloration means a thing 's color. help means advantage. blending in is synonymous with hiding. habitat is similar to environment. an environment means an area. the color of an environment means the color of the things that environment contains. 
a complete revolution of the Earth around the sun takes (1 ; one) (year ; solar year ; Earth year). a revolution is when something revolves around something else. 
the Great Lakes were formed by glaciers moving over the ground. (motion ; movement) means (moving ; to move). 
rock is made of minerals. knowing the properties of something means knowing information about that something. the properties of something can be (used to identify ; used to describe) that something. the composition of something can be used to identify that something. a property is a kind of information. if something is made of (something ; a material) then that something contains (that something ; that material). composed of means made of. composition is a property of (an object ; matter). a rock is a kind of object. 
the nervous system sends observations in the form of electrical signals to the rest of the body. 
clouds are formed by water vapor rising and condensing. (cooling ; colder) means (removing ; reducing ; decreasing) (heat ; temperature). heat means heat energy. losing something decreases the amount of that something. water vapor cooling causes that water vapor to condense. water is in the gas state , called water vapor , for temperatures between (373 ; 212 ; 100) and 100000000000 (K ; F ; C). condensing means changing from a gas into a liquid by reducing heat energy. to reduce means to decrease. 
(boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. if something is outside during the day then that something will receive sunlight. the sun is a source of (radiation ; heat) called sunlight. if (an object ; a substance) absorbs solar energy then (that object ; that substance) will increase in temperature. adding heat means increasing temperature. a drop is a small amount of liquid. sunlight means solar energy. if a liquid disappears then that liquid probably evaporated. receiving sunlight is synonymous with absorbing sunlight. heat means heat energy. the sun is the source of solar energy called sunlight. water is a kind of substance. 
a warm front causes cloudy and rainy weather. cloudy means the presence of clouds in the sky. a cloud is a kind of weather. precipitation is a kind of weather. rain is a kind of precipitation. clouds are formed by water vapor rising and condensing. a warm front is when warm air mass rises and passes over a cold air mass. to cause means to result in. 
a unicellular organism has one cell. a multicellular organism has more than one cell. how many means what number. one is a kind of number. 
a warm front is when warm air mass rises and passes over a cold air mass. a warm front causes cloudy and rainy weather. cloudy means the presence of clouds in the sky. clouds are formed by water vapor rising and condensing. water vapor cooling causes that water vapor to condense. precipitation is when (rain ; snow ; hail) fall from clouds to the (Earth ; ground). 
decomposer is a kind of role (in the food chain process ; in an ecosystem). decomposition is when a decomposer (recycles ; returns) nutrients from dead organisms to the soil by eating those dead organisms. an (animal ; living thing) requires nutrients for survival. if some nutrients are in the soil then those nutrients are in the food chain. decomposition is when a decomposer breaks down dead organisms. break down means change from a whole into pieces. 
an animal is a kind of organism. a plant is a kind of organism. an organism is a living thing. an (animal ; living thing) requires nutrients for survival. decomposition is when a decomposer (recycles ; returns) nutrients from dead organisms to the soil by eating those dead organisms. a decomposer is usually a bacterium or fungus. green plants provide food for (themselves ; animals ; consumers) by performing photosynthesis. a (plant ; living thing) requires nutrients to grow. an animal needs to eat food for nutrients. many animals are herbivores. herbivores only eat plants. if an organism eats something then that something is a source of frood to that organism. 
a blue jay is a kind of bird. seed dispersal is when the seeds of a plant are moved from the plant to a new environment. An example of seed dispersal is is an animal (hiding ; gathering ; burying) seeds. an oak is a kind of tree. a tree is a kind of plant. a bird is a kind of animal. plant requires seed dispersal for reproduction. requiring is similar to needing help. (to help ; to benefit) means to be of use. 
friction occurs when two object 's surfaces move against each other. friction causes the temperature of an object to increase. temperature is a measure of heat energy. heat energy is synonymous with thermal energy. a surface is a part of an object. (to rub ; to rub together) means to move against. warm means medium (heat energy ; temperature). temperature rise means become warmer. temperature rise means temperature increase. a hand is a kind of object. producing is similar to causing. 
herbivores only eat plants. a cow is a kind of herbivore. cows only eat plants. (carnivores ; omnivores ; herbivores) are a kind of animal. a cow is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. 
the crust is a layer of the Earth. the mantle is a layer of the Earth. the mantle is located just below Earth 's crust. 
flexible means high flexibility. flexibility means the shape (of a material ; of an object) can be easily changed. a drinking straw is flexible. a drinking straw is a kind of object. 
as an object descends into water , the pressure on that object will increase. an ocean is a kind of body of water. a submarine is a kind of object. 
cutting down trees has a negative impact on an (ecosystem ; organisms living in an ecosystem). clearing a forest means humans cutting down the trees. building usually requires cutting down trees. the Earth contains many ecosystems. 
a (plant ; living thing) requires nutrients to grow. the top layer of soil contains the most nutrients. soil contains nutrients for plants. if something requires something else then that something else is important to that something. 
(igneous rocks ; minerals) are formed from (magma ; lava) cooling. igneous is a kind of rock. a type is synonymous with a kind. 
folding an object causes that object to change shape. a paper is a kind of object. shape is a kind of physical property. 
the continental shelf is shallow. the continental shelf is made of sediment. the continental shelf is located near the shore. the continental shelf is a part of the ocean. 
kilometers ( km ) are a unit used for measuring (length ; distance) generally used for values between 1 and 50000000. Richmond is a kind of town. Norfolk is a kind of town. towns are usually located kilometers from each other. 
a balance is used for measuring (mass ; weight) (of an object ; of a substance). a graduated cylinder is used to measure volume (of a liquid ; of an object). a balance is a kind of instrument for (measuring mass ; measuring weight). a graduated cylinder is a kind of instrument for measuring volume of liquids or objects. comparing requires measuring. marble is a kind of (object ; material). 
sonar is used to find the location of an object. the location of an object can be used to describe that object. information is used to describe something. 
a complete revolution of the Earth around the sun takes (1 ; one) (year ; solar year ; Earth year). 
Matter in the gas phase has variable volume. Matter in the gas phase has variable shape. definite is the opposite of variable. gas is a kind of state of matter. 
texture is a property of (surfaces ; materials ; objects) and includes ordered values of (smooth ; rough). touch is a kind of sense. touch can be used for detecting texture. an object has properties. detecting is similar to observing. a surface is a part of an object. 
moving an object from a cool place to a warm place causes the object 's temperature to increase. heat means temperature increases. a freezer is used for cooling things. an ice cube is a kind of solid. melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. adding heat means increasing temperature. heat means heat energy. a freezer is (cool ; cold) in temperature. 
friction acts to counter the motion of two objects when their surfaces are touching. friction occurs when two object 's surfaces move against each other. counter means (reduce ; stop ; resist). (stop ; stopped) means (zero ; 0 ; no) speed. a roll is a kind of movement. a ball is a kind of object. a surface is a part of an object. 
conductivity is a property of a (material ; substance). electrical conduction is when (metals ; electrical conductors) conduct electricity through (a wire ; electrical conductor ; metal). if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. 
if an object is black then that object absorbs all (visible light ; heat). sunlight is a kind of light. a panel is a kind of object. amount is a property of something and includes ordered values of (none ; least ; little ; some ; half ; much ; many ; most ; all). black is a kind of color. 
the colors of the parts of an organism are inherited characteristics. a cat is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. white is a kind of color. fur is a covering around the body of an animal. inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). fur is often part of an animal. trait is synonymous with characteristic. 
bark is a kind of sound. loud means high in (sound energy ; sound intensity). hearing is used for sensing sound by animals. sound can be used for communication by animals. a prairie dog is a kind of animal. 
a trunk is a part of a tree for supporting the tree. a trunk is a source of support for a tree. to provide something means to be the source of that something. providing support is a kind of function. 
fur is a covering around the body of an animal. some animals' fur grows thicker for staying warm in the winter. An example of a seasonal change is an animal growing thick fur for keeping warm in the winter. shedding is when an animal loses (hair ; fur ; skin). when an animal sheds its fur , its fur becomes less dense. some animals shed fur in warm weather. winter is a kind of season. spring has warm (temperatures ; weather). seasons cause change to the environment. spring is a kind of season. changes in an environment cause (animals ; plants) to adapt to survive. seasonal changes are made in response to changes in the environment. 
coloration is a kind of adaptation for (hiding ; camouflage). camouflage is a kind of adaptation for hiding in an environment. blending in is synonymous with hiding. coloration means a thing 's color. An example of camouflage is when something (is ; has) the same color as its environment. camouflage is a kind of protection (against predators ; from predators ; against consumers). camouflage is used for (protection ; hiding) by (prey ; animals) (against predators ; from predators). hiding means (visibility ; ability to be seen) decreases for camouflage. 
all animals breathe. living things can all reproduce. an animal is a kind of living thing. breathing is a kind of process. reproduction is a kind of process. an animal is a member of an animal species. 
most animals avoid bad odors. a predator is a kind of animal. a skunk produces a bad odor. (avoiding predators ; escaping predators ; avoiding consumers) is a kind of protection Move to PREDATOR-PREY.. protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
some birds are predators. (predators ; carnivores ; omnivores) eat other animals. harming an animal species causes that animal 's population to decrease. death means to die. killing means harming something causing death. as population of predators decreases , the population of prey will increase in an environment. a predator is a kind of animal. an environment means an area. 
water is in the gas state , called water vapor , for temperatures between (373 ; 212 ; 100) and 100000000000 (K ; F ; C). water vapor is invisible. found in means existing in. water vapor is found in the atmosphere. 
a cell wall is a part of a plant cell for supporting and protecting the cell membrane. chloroplast is a part of a plant cell. a cell nucleus is a part of a cell. a plant cell is a kind of cell. a cell is a kind of object. microscope is used to see (small things ; microscopic things ; specimens) by making them appear bigger. observe means see. 
if fossils of a water animal or plant are found in a place then that place used to be covered by water in the past. if fossils of a water animal or plant are found in a place then that animal or plant used to live in that place. a seashell is a part of a crab. a crab is a kind of water animal. an ocean is a kind of body of water. An example of a change in the Earth is an ocean becoming a wooded area. 
a plant is a kind of living thing. cellular respiration is when cells break down food to produce energy. food is a source of energy for (animals ; plants). a living thing is made of cells. an animal is a kind of living thing. all cells perform cellular respiration. 
a simple machine requires mechanical energy to function. a physicist studies energy. a physicist is a kind of scientist. a type is synonymous with a kind. 
color is a kind of (physical ; visual) property. color is a property of (an object ; a material). an apple is a kind of fruit. a fruit is a kind of object. 
the cell nucleus controls many of the functions of the cell. a cell nucleus is a part of a cell. a function is an activity. controlling is a kind of function. 
nearly all fossils are found in sedimentary rock. a shell is a kind of fossil. classifying is when one sorts something by (kind ; type). sedimentary is a kind of rock. 
as mass (of a planet ; of a celestial body) increases , the force of gravity on that planet will increase. as the force of gravity increases , the weight of objects will increase. a ball is a kind of object. Earth is a kind of planet. a moon is a kind of celestial (object ; body). the earth has more mass than the moon. less is the opposite of more. increase means more. 
if fossils of a water animal or plant are found in a place then that place used to be covered by water in the past. if fossils of a water animal or plant are found in a place then that animal or plant used to live in that place. a mussel is a kind of water animal. a river is a kind of flowing body of water. place means area. 
as the kinetic energy of a molecule increases , the temperature will increase. matter is made of molecules. water is a kind of matter. (boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. water is in the gas state , called water vapor , for temperatures between (373 ; 212 ; 100) and 100000000000 (K ; F ; C). temperature is a measure of heat energy. to add means to increase. 
if an object reflects more light then that object is more easily seen. eyes are a part of a human for seeing. 
a population is made of one type of organism in an area. a community is made of many types of organisms in an area. 
a quartz is made of six-sided transparent crystals. quartz scratches glass easily. quartz is a kind of mineral. 
a balloon is highly flexible. a balloon contains gas. (warm ; becoming warm) means heat is added. heating means adding heat. a container contains (objects ; material ; substances). contract is the opposite of expand. a freezer is (cool ; cold) in temperature. cooling means temperature decreases. heat means temperature increases. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. Matter in the gas phase has variable volume. variable means able to change. contract is a kind of change in volume. expand is a kind of change in volume. as heat increases , a flexible container containing gas will expand. 
the sun is average in size for a star in our galaxy. the sun is average in temperature for a star in our galaxy. (temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). the properties of something can be (used to identify ; used to describe) that something. size is a property of objects and includes ordered values of (microscopic ; tiny ; small ; medium ; large). a star is a kind of (celestial object ; celestial body). 
potential energy means stored energy. motion is a source of kinetic energy in an object. a car is a kind of object. rolling is a kind of motion. as an object moves down , potential energy will decrease. a source of something increases the amount of that something. 
some birds are predators. predators eat prey. some predators move quickly to catch prey. a robin is a kind of bird. if an animal eats another animal then that animal is a carnivore or omnivore or predator. a bird is a kind of animal. a cricket is a kind of insect. an insect is a kind of animal. 
chlorophyll is used for absorbing light energy by plants. photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. solar energy is a kind of light. purpose means role. something is used for that something 's purpose. 
plasma is formed by electrons separating from atoms in stars. plasma is a kind of state of matter. pulling away is similar to separating. a star is very hot in temperature. formation of a state of matter is a kind of process. 
photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. solar energy is a kind of light. light means light energy. food is a kind of chemical energy. to convert means to change. 
an inclined plane is a kind of simple machine. a type is synonymous with a kind. inclined means sloping. a pathway is a kind of plane. an inclined plane is used for (raising ; lowering) objects. raising is a kind of motion. lowering is a kind of motion. pushing is a kind of motion. a block is a kind of object. 
national parks have a positive impact on ecosystems. impact means effect. national parks limit (mining ; logging ; hunting). to limit means to decrease. mining changes an ecosystem. humans changing (ecosystems ; environments) usually has a negative impact on an (ecosystem ; organisms living in an ecosystem). logging is when humans cut down (trees ; forests) for wood. cutting down trees has a negative impact on an (ecosystem ; organisms living in an ecosystem). hunting means humans kill animals in the wild. killing means harming something causing death. harming an animal species has a negative impact on the population size of that species. an animal is a kind of organism. organisms are a part of an environment. an environment is similar to an ecosystem. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. decreasing something negative has a positive impact on a thing. 
a living thing is made of cells. if an object is made of something then the parts of that object are made of of that something. all living things are made of cells according to the cell theory. 
(matter ; materials ; substances) are made of (atoms ; particles). 
mass is a measure of the amount of matter in an object. 
a fish is a kind of animal. a fish is a kind of scaled animal. gills are a part of a fish used for breathing water. fish lay eggs. to belong to a group means to be a kind of something. to belong to a group means to be classified in that group. classifying means grouping (objects ; materials) by their properties. an animal is a kind of living thing. a living thing is a kind of object. laying eggs is a kind of property of an animal. 
mimicry is used for avoiding predators by animals by camouflaging as a dangerous animal. a Western coral snake is a kind of snake. an Arizona mountain king snake is a kind of snake. a snake is a kind of animal. a poisonous animal is dangerous. coloration is a kind of adaptation for (hiding ; camouflage). coloration means a pattern of colors. looking like is similar to camouflaging as. a western coral snake is poisonous. 
soil erosion is when (wind ; moving water ; gravity) move soil from (fields ; environments). flowing is a kind of motion. 
drought means available water decreases in an environment. drying means (amount of water ; amount of liquid ; wetness) decreases. drought may cause wildfires. a drought is a kind of natural event. wildfire is when a forest catches fire. fire causes burning. dry wood easily burns. a forest contains (plants ; trees). a tree contains wood. 
a refrigerator is a kind of appliance. appliance is similar to technology. a refrigerator is used for keeping food fresh for a long period of time. (to help ; to benefit) means to be of use. 
water is a kind of nonliving thing. a river is a kind of flowing body of water. a mushroom is a kind of fungus. a fungus is a kind of living thing. a tree is a kind of plant. a plant is a kind of living thing. a worm is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. (nonliving ; non-living ; die) is the opposite of (living ; alive ; live). 
rock is made of minerals. made up of means (contains ; made of). 
(to slow ; to slow down) decreases speed. friction acts to counter the motion of two objects when their surfaces are touching. to touch means to contact. a surface is a part of an object. pushing is a kind of motion. pulling is a kind of motion. counter means (reduce ; stop ; resist). to reduce means to decrease. rolling is a kind of motion. a ball is a kind of object. friction is a kind of force. a type is synonymous with a kind. 
endangered means low in population. fishing is when a human (kills ; catches) fish for food. killing means harming something causing death. harming an animal species causes that animal 's population to decrease. a fish is a kind of animal. as population of prey decreases , the population of predators will decrease. predators eat prey. a predator is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. to lower means to decrease. lack of food causes starvation. lack is similar to (low ; little). an animal needs to eat food for nutrients. an (animal ; living thing) requires nutrients for survival. survival means to survive. survive means live. (nonliving ; non-living ; die) is the opposite of (living ; alive ; live). death means to die. an ecosystem contains (a large community of ; large numbers of) living organisms in a particular place. fishing has a negative impact on ecosystems. impact means effect. 
feeling is when an living thing senses through touch. texture means how an object feels. different types of soil have different textures. the properties of something can be (used to identify ; used to describe) that something. texture is a property of (surfaces ; materials ; objects) and includes ordered values of (smooth ; rough). soil is a kind of material. 
shortest means (least ; smallest) in length. lowest means least in (value ; amount ; number). as a source of light moves directly overhead of an object , the size of the shadow of that object will decrease. the sun is the source of solar energy called sunlight. sunlight is a kind of light. a sunny day has lots of sunlight. the sun is located directly overhead at noon. a flagpole is a kind of object. length is a part of size. to lower means to decrease. a flagpole is a kind of object. noon is a kind of time of day. 
an ecosystem contains (a large community of ; large numbers of) living organisms in a particular place. an organism is a living thing. an ecosystem contains nonliving things. 
(boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. heating means adding heat. heat means heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. if a liquid disappears then that liquid probably evaporated. disappeared is similar to gone. liquid is a kind of state of matter. gas is a kind of state of matter. 
algae is found in bodies of water. a lake is a kind of body of water. fertilizers have a positive impact on algae growth. runoff contains (chemicals ; fertilizer ; pollutants ; pesticides) from cropland. cropland is used for farming by humans. runoff is when cropland water (enters ; runs off into) bodies of water. impact means effect. 
decomposer is a kind of role (in the food chain process ; in an ecosystem). decomposition is when a decomposer breaks down dead organisms. an organism is made of organic matter. 
decomposition is when a decomposer breaks down dead organisms. a leaf is a part of a tree. a tree is a kind of plant. a plant is a kind of organism. if a leaf falls off of a tree then that leaf is dead. 
many vehicles emit pollution into the air. a car is a kind of vehicle. burning (gasoline ; oil) is a source of pollution. electricity causes less pollution than gasoline. electricity means electrical energy. help means advantage. helping something has a positive impact on that something. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. pollution has a negative impact on the (environment ; air quality). vehicles usually require gasoline to operate. 
fertilizers have a negative impact on the (environment ; natural resources). fertilizers are a source of pollution. a body of water is a kind of environment. a river is a kind of flowing body of water. pollution is when humans pollute the environment with pollutants. polluting means (something harmful ; something poisonous) is added to an environment causing harm to the environment. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. 
a star is a source of (light ; light energy) through nuclear reactions. 
wood is an (electrical ; electrical energy ; thermal energy) insulator. heat energy is synonymous with thermal energy. heat means heat energy. (cooling ; colder) means (removing ; reducing ; decreasing) (heat ; temperature). an insulator is the opposite of a conductor. if (a thermal conductor ; an object) is exposed to a source of heat then (that conductor ; that object) may become (hot ; warm). (temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). a stove is used for cooking by generating heat. if (one surface ; one substance ; one object) touches something then one is exposed to that something. if (a spoon ; an object) is used to stir a (liquid ; mixture) then (that spoon ; that object) is touching (that liquid ; that mixture). soup is a kind of liquid. if food is cooked then heat energy is added to that food. soup is a kind of food. a spoon is a kind of object. if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. conductivity is a property of a (material ; substance). wood is a kind of natural material. staying cool is the opposite of becoming hot. 
a ship is used for moving (people ; products) across bodies of water. a airplane is used for moving (people ; products) (across bodies of water ; to far away places). an ocean is a kind of body of water. 
as lightness in color of an object increases , the ability of that object to reflect light will increase. dark is the opposite of light. reflecting (light ; sound) is the opposite of absorbing (light ; sound). sunlight is a kind of light. sunlight produces heat. hot means high in (heat energy ; temperature). summer has hot (temperatures ; weather). a white object reflects all visible light. if (an object ; a substance) absorbs solar energy then (that object ; that substance) will increase in temperature. a shirt is a kind of article of clothing. an article of clothing is a kind of object. staying cool has a positive impact on a human 's comfort. better means good. good means positive. 
hardness is a property of a (material ; an object) and includes ordered values of (malleable ; rigid). a mineral is a kind of (solid ; natural) material. the properties of something can be (used to identify ; used to describe) that something. 
as the supply of food in an environment decreases , the population of animals in that environment will decrease. a field is a kind of environment. a mouse is a kind of animal. 
as temperature in the environment increases , the body temperature of a reptile in that environment will increase. an increase is a kind of change. as temperature during the day increases , the temperature in an environment will increase. warm up means increase temperature. extreme temperatures cause an organism 's energy levels to decrease. a reptile is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. cold means low in temperature. to lower means to decrease. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. being active requires energy. (temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). 
a magnifying glass is a kind of tool for observing small things. magnifying glass is used to see small things by making objects appear bigger. an insect usually has a small size. 
a plastic spoon is made of plastic. plastic is a kind of material made by humans. made by humans is the opposite of natural. a spoon is a kind of object. an object is an item. 
a Rotation of the Earth on (Earth 's axis ; itself) takes (1 ; one) day. the Earth rotating on its axis causes the sun to appear to move across the sky during the day. if it is night then the sun has set. the night time is part of one day. Earth is a kind of planet. a planet rotating causes cycles of day and night on that planet. setting is a kind of motion. 
a cake is a kind of baked product. baking is when a human makes food by adding heat. a kind of something is an example of that something. 
an automobile is a kind of vehicle. many vehicles emit pollution into the air. pollution has a negative impact on the (environment ; air quality). (a concern ; a problem) is a possible negative impact. if something emits something else then that something increases the amount of that something else. if (something ; an invention ; a discovery) is (invented ; discovered) then (that something ; that invention ; that discovery) can be used. using a car causes pollution. 
An example of a reproductive behavior is salmon returning to their birthplace to lay their eggs. reproductive behavior is an inherited characteristic. an instinctive behavior is a kind of (inherited characteristic ; behavioral adaptation). 
a plant is a kind of living thing. trees of different species have differently shaped leaves. an oak is a kind of tree. a maple tree is a kind of tree. to tell the difference between things means to classify those things. a leaf is a part of a tree. classifying means grouping (objects ; materials) by their properties. a tree is a kind of plant. a living thing is a kind of object. a plant is a member of a plant species. shape of the parts of something is a property of that something. 
a pebble is a kind of small rock. (rocks ; soil ; materials) interacting with (wind ; moving water) over long periods of time causes weathering. sometimes weathering (smooths ; rounds) rocks. a riverbed is a part of a river. a river is a kind of flowing body of water. contact between rocks over long periods of time causes rocks to smooth. rubbing against something is a kind of contact. 
a rabbit is a kind of animal. In the food chain process an animal has the role of consumer which eats (producers ; other animals) for food. green plants provide food for (themselves ; animals ; consumers) by performing photosynthesis. rabbits eat plants. green plants are a kind of producer. consumers eat other organisms. a plant is a kind of organism. 
(rocks ; soil ; materials) interacting with (wind ; moving water) over long periods of time causes weathering. sometimes weathering (smooths ; rounds) rocks. 
measuring the hardness of minerals requires scratching those materials. comparing requires measuring. 
plants absorb (nutrients ; water ; oxygen) from soil into themselves through their roots. roots are a vehicle for absorbing water and nutrients from soil into the plant. some minerals are sometimes nutrients. to be a vehicle for is a kind of function. 
temperature changing can cause phase changes. water is a kind of substance. a phase change is when (matter ; a substance) changes from one state into another state. 
a planet rotating causes cycles of day and night on that planet. Earth is a kind of planet. the Earth rotates on its axis on its axis. 
water is in the gas state , called water vapor , for temperatures between (373 ; 212 ; 100) and 100000000000 (K ; F ; C). condensing means changing from a gas into a liquid by reducing heat energy. condensing is a kind of process. water is in the liquid state , called liquid water , for temperatures between (273 ; 32 ; 0) and (373 ; 212 ; 100) (K ; F ; C). 
metamorphosis is when an animal changes from an immature form to an adult form. a butterfly is a kind of animal. a caterpillar is the immature form of a butterfly. a butterfly is the (mature form of a ; adult form of a) caterpillar. 
color is an intensive property. rock is made of minerals. objects are made of (materials ; substances ; matter). as (amount ; size) of something increases , the intensive properties of that something will not change. color is a property of (an object ; a material). as the (amount ; size) of something increases , the extensive properties of that something will increase. a rock is a kind of object. two objects are usually different in size. (mass ; weight) is an extensive property. shape is an extensive property. size is an extensive property. 
freezing means changing from a liquid into a solid by reducing heat energy. take away means decreasing. to reduce means to decrease. water is a kind of liquid. heat means heat energy. becoming is similar to changing. 
a quartz is made of six-sided transparent crystals. a mineral usually has a crystal structure. being made of crystals is synonymous with having a crystal structure. classifying means grouping (objects ; materials) by their properties. a mineral is a kind of (solid ; natural) material. structure is a property of (an object ; a material ; a substance). 
a plant requires a specific climate to grow and survive. a climate is synonymous with an environment. an environment is a kind of place. 
a plant is a kind of living thing. a leaf is a part of a green plant. a leaf performs (photosynthesis ; gas exchange). photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. a part of a living thing is a natural structure. 
preferences are generally learned characteristics. a food preference is a kind of preference. inherited characteristics are the opposite of (learned characteristics ; acquired characteristics). favorite means highest preference. trait is synonymous with characteristic. 
(igneous rocks ; minerals) are formed from (magma ; lava) cooling. igneous is a kind of rock. a type is synonymous with a kind. 
decomposition is when a decomposer breaks down dead organisms. decomposition increases the amount of nutrients in the soil. decomposition is when a decomposer (recycles ; returns) nutrients from dead organisms to the soil by eating those dead organisms. a plant is a kind of organism. fertile soil is high in quality. (high quality ; rich ; good) soil has a high number of nutrients. high is similar to increase. farming is when a human plants crops for food. crops are a kind of edible plant for eating. a (plant ; living thing) requires nutrients to grow. planting crops is synonymous with growing crops. if something is required for a process then that something positively impacts that process. to be good for means to have a positive impact on. farming is a kind of process. to contain means to have inside. if something is made of (something ; a material) then that something contains (that something ; that material). if something is made of something else then the formation of that something requires that something else. if something requires something else then that something else is important to that something. 
an animal knows how to do instinctive behaviors when it is born. a sea turtle is a kind of animal. walking is a kind of behavior. newly hatched is similar to just born. 
some light bulbs convert electricity into light and heat energy. electricity means electrical energy. to convert means to change. light means light energy. 
a barometer is a kind of instrument for measuring air pressure. a barometer is used to measure air pressure. 
amphibians undergo metamorphosis. a frog is a kind of amphibian. an amphibian is a kind of animal. metamorphosis is when an animal changes from an immature form to an adult form. a tadpole is the immature form of a frog. a frog is the (mature form of a ; adult form of a) tadpole. 
humidity is the amount of (water vapor ; moisture) (in the air ; in the atmosphere). humidity is a property of weather and include ordered values of (dry ; humid). a weather report describes weather. the properties of something are used for describing that something. 
an animal knows how to do instinctive behaviors when it is born. 
a wolf is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. the condition of the parts of an organism are acquired characteristics. fur is often part of an animal. an organism 's environment affects that organism 's acquired characteristics. 
measuring the hardness of minerals requires scratching those materials. testing often requires measuring. 
a mouse is a kind of animal. In the food chain process an animal has the role of consumer which eats (producers ; other animals) for food. green plants are a kind of producer. food is a source of energy for (animals ; plants). (eating ; taking in) food is used to get (nutrients ; energy) by (animals ; living things). living things all require energy for survival. an animal is a kind of living thing. if an organism eats something then that something is a source of frood to that organism. receive means get. herbivores only eat plants. a mouse is a kind of herbivore. 
scavengers eat dead organisms. a fish is a kind of aquatic animal. an aquatic animal is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. if a living thing dies then that living thing is dead. an organism is a living thing. if an organism eats something then that something is a source of frood to that organism. 
weathering means breaking down (rocks ; surface materials) from larger whole into smaller pieces by weather. ice wedging is a kind of mechanical weathering. ice wedging is when ice causes rocks to crack by expanding in openings. cycles of freezing and thawing water cause ice wedging. cracking something may cause that something to break apart. to cause means to make. 
speed is a measure of distance travelled (over time ; divided by time). calculating speed requires knowing distance travelled. requiring something means needing that something. 
a mushroom is a kind of fungus. In the food chain process fungi have the role of decomposer. decomposition is when a decomposer breaks down dead organisms. dead organisms rot. dead organisms are the source of nutrients for decomposers. a (plant ; living thing) requires nutrients to grow. a fungus is a kind of living thing. . 
as the size of a flower increases , the number of pollinators it will attract increases. as the amount of fragrance of a flower increases , the number of pollinators it will attract increases. larger means (greater ; higher ; more) in size. a flower is a part of a plant for (attracting pollinators ; producing seeds). a rose is a kind of flower. A bee is a pollinating animal. (plant reproduction ; seed production) requires pollination. pollination is when (pollinating animals ; wind ; water) carry pollen from one flower to another flower. (plant reproduction ; seed production) requires pollination. an adaptation is an advantage. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). as the number of pollinators attracted to a flower increases , the ability of that flower to reproduce will increase. smaller means (less ; lower) in size. less is similar to decrease. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. 
the sun transfers (solar energy ; light energy ; heat energy) from itself to the (planets ; Earth) through sunlight. the sun is the source of energy for physical cycles on Earth. the sun is a source of (radiation ; heat) called sunlight. 
sometimes weathering (smooths ; rounds) rocks. (rocks ; soil ; materials) interacting with (wind ; moving water) over long periods of time causes weathering. a pebble is a kind of small rock. waves are made of moving water. 
if food is not immediately used by the body for energy then that food will be stored for future use. 
an insulator is the opposite of a conductor. rubber is an (electrical ; electrical energy ; thermal ; thermal energy) insulator. wood is an (electrical ; electrical energy ; thermal energy) insulator. plastic is usually an electrical insulator. metal is an (electrical ; electrical energy) conductor. metal is a kind of material. copper is a kind of metal. electricity means electrical energy. 
amount of water in a body of water increases by (storms ; rain ; glaciers melting ; snow melting ; ice melting). an ocean is a kind of body of water. as the amount of water in a body of water increases , the water levels will (rise ; increase). 
pollution has a negative impact on the (environment ; air quality). polluting gasses are a kind of pollution. humans cause pollution. polluting means (something harmful ; something poisonous) is added to an environment causing harm to the environment. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. as the amount of polluting gasses in the atmoshere increases , the atmospheric temperature will increase. if the atmospheric temperature rises then the glaciers will melt. glaciers melting has a negative impact on the glaicial environment. producing is similar to causing. 
an ocean is a kind of body of water. amount of water in a body of water increases by (storms ; rain ; glaciers melting ; snow melting ; ice melting). as the amount of water in a body of water increases , the water levels will (rise ; increase). less is similar to decrease. as the level of water rises , the amount of available land will decrease. humans live on land. 
a cycle (happens ; occurs) repeatedly. weathering means breaking down (rocks ; surface materials) from larger whole into smaller pieces by weather. cycles of freezing and thawing water cause ice wedging. ice wedging is a kind of mechanical weathering. 
the Sun is the star that is closest to Earth. classifying is when one sorts something by (kind ; type). the Sun is a kind of star. 
a complete revolution of the Earth around the sun takes (1 ; one) (year ; solar year ; Earth year). revolving is a kind of motion. a revolution is when something revolves around something else. a type is synonymous with a kind. 
(high quality ; rich ; good) soil has a high number of nutrients. farming is when a human plants crops for food. planting crops is synonymous with growing crops. crops are a kind of edible plant for eating. a plant requires soil for (survival ; to grow). a (plant ; living thing) requires nutrients to grow. soil contains nutrients for plants. plants absorb (nutrients ; water ; oxygen) from soil into themselves through their roots. soil is a renewable resource for growing plants. a renewable resource is a kind of natural resource. a natural resource is a kind of environmental factor. a region is similar to an environment. if something is required for a process then that something positively impacts that process. influence means impact. farming is a kind of process. 
Pluto is a kind of dwarf planet. (larger ; bigger) is the opposite of smaller. a dwarf planet is usually much smaller (in size ; in mass) than other planets. planets have cleared their orbits. pluto has not cleared its orbit. 
damage means harm. pollution has a negative impact on the (environment ; air quality). harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. offshore oil platforms might cause oil to leak into the water. oil is a kind of pollutant. pollution is when humans pollute the environment with pollutants. a body of water is a kind of environment. impact means effect. 
fossil means preserved remains of organisms. fossils are formed when layers of sediment cover the remains of organisms over time. an animal is a kind of organism. a plant is a kind of organism. 
phase changes do not change mass. melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. melting is a kind of phase change. (mass ; weight) is a property of (matter ; objects ; materials). 
an earthquake changes Earth 's surface quickly. rapidly means quickly. soil erosion is a kind of (slow ; natural) process. (rocks ; soil ; materials) interacting with (wind ; moving water) over long periods of time causes weathering. weathering is a kind of erosion. flowing is a kind of motion. to wash away is a kind of movement by moving water. an earthquake causes the ground to shake. an earthquake usually occurs over a period of 10 to 30 seconds. (weathering ; erosion) usually occurs over a period of many years. 
water is a kind of liquid. (boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. water is in the gas state , called water vapor , for temperatures between (373 ; 212 ; 100) and 100000000000 (K ; F ; C). 
sunshine means sunlight. sunlight and rain can cause a rainbow. 
a bubble contains gas. air is a kind of gas. to contain means to have inside. 
the Sun is a kind of star. stars are some of the hottest objects. 
herbivores only eat plants. a rabbit is a kind of herbivore. a rabbit is a kind of animal. 
copper is a kind of metal. metal is a (thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. heat energy is synonymous with thermal energy. heat means heat energy. (pot ; pan ; frying pan) is made of metal for cooking. a (pan ; frying pan) is used for cooking food by heating food in it on a stove. cooking food requires adding heat energy. heating means adding heat. 
a plant is a kind of living thing. a rabbit is a kind of animal. a bird is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. a seed is a kind of young plant. 
a revolution of the moon around the Earth takes (1 ; one) month. each of the moon 's phases usually occurs once per month. months are a kind of unit for measuring time. a full moon is a kind of phase of the moon. the moon (revolving around ; orbiting) the Earth causes the phases of the moon. 
a plant is a kind of living thing. a flower is a part of a plant for (attracting pollinators ; producing seeds). an organism is a living thing. the colors of the parts of an organism are inherited characteristics. yellow is a kind of color. inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). 
objects are made of (materials ; substances ; matter). (mass ; weight) is a property of (matter ; objects ; materials). 
photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. sunlight is a kind of solar energy. solar energy is a kind of energy. 
damage means harm. a lung is a kind of organ for breathing air. smoking causes direct damage to the lungs. 
most means over 50%. oceans cover 70% of the surface of the earth. an ocean is a kind of body of water. 
fur is usually part of a mammal. mammals (birth ; give birth to) live young. a monkey (births ; gives birth to) live young. a mouse (births ; gives birth to) live young. a bat (births ; gives birth to) live young. fur is a part of a mouse. fur is a part of a monkey. fur is a part of a bat. a monkey is a kind of mammal. a bat is a kind of mammal. a mouse is a kind of mammal. 
healing requires (rest ; nutrients ; energy). (eating ; taking in) food is used to get (nutrients ; energy) by (animals ; living things). food is a source of energy for (animals ; plants). a human is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. Tommy is a name for a human. 
the moon reflects sunlight towards the Earth. sunlight is a kind of light. the sun is a source of (light ; light energy) called sunlight. if an object reflects light toward the eye then that object can be seen. a moon is a kind of celestial (object ; body). where something comes from is a source of that something. 
a tree is a kind of plant. a plant is a kind of organism. an organism is a living thing. In the food chain process a green plant has the role of producer. photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. 
an egg requires warmth to (survive ; hatch ; develop). sitting on something provides warmth to that something. providing warmth is synonymous with keeping warm. 
rain is a kind of precipitation. precipitation is a kind of natural (occurrence ; cause). soil is made of very small (rocks ; minerals). soil erosion is when (wind ; moving water ; gravity) move soil from (fields ; environments). rain is a kind of water. washing out means being moved from by water. erosion is a kind of change. 
the sun is a source of (light ; light energy) called sunlight. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. a candle is a source of light when it is burned. the Sun is a kind of star. a star is a kind of (celestial object ; celestial body). a candle is a kind of object. 
a (hot ; warm) something is a source of heat. if (a thermal conductor ; an object) is exposed to a source of heat then (that conductor ; that object) may become (hot ; warm). if (one surface ; one substance ; one object) touches something then one is exposed to that something. being in something means touching that something. warmer means (greater ; higher) in temperature. (temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). an egg is a kind of object. water is a kind of substance. if a hot (object ; substance) is (exposed to ; touches) a cold (object ; substance) then (that object ; that substance) will likely cool. (cooling ; colder) means (removing ; reducing ; decreasing) (heat ; temperature). 
Earth is a kind of planet. a planet rotating causes cycles of day and night on that planet. the Earth rotates on its axis on its axis. rotate means turn. 
the slope of the land causes a river to flow in a particular direction. slope is a measure of the difference in elevation between one part of the land and another part of the land. water flows down a slope. elevation relative to sea level is a measure of how high a place is relative to sea level. down is a kind of direction. 
two females can not usually reproduce with each other. reproduction produces offspring. if all members of a species cannot produce offspring then that species will likely become extinct. die out means become extinct. a tiger is a kind of animal. an animal is a member of an animal species. 
migration is an instinctive behavior. an animal knows how to do instinctive behaviors when it is born. 
a flower produces pollen and seeds. a flower is a part of a plant for (attracting pollinators ; producing seeds). a flower 's purpose is to produce seeds. purpose means role. 
diamond is a kind of mineral. 
decomposition increases the amount of nutrients in the soil. to add means to increase. decomposition is when a decomposer (recycles ; returns) nutrients from dead organisms to the soil by eating those dead organisms. an organism is a source of organic matter. a plant is a kind of organism. an animal is a kind of organism. (high quality ; rich ; good) soil has a high number of nutrients. high is similar to increase. 
the (freezing point of water ; melting point of water) is (32F ; 0C ; 273K). freezing means changing from a liquid into a solid by reducing heat energy. to reduce means to decrease. a decrease is a kind of change. temperature is a measure of heat energy. rain is a kind of precipitation. sleet is a kind of precipitation. rain is a kind of water. sleet is a kind of ice. water is a kind of liquid. water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). ice is a kind of solid. freezing point means temperature (at which a liquid freezes ; below which a liquid freezes). 
water is a kind of nonliving thing. rock is a kind of nonliving thing. light is a kind of nonliving thing. sunlight is a kind of light. 
a tree is a source of (shelter ; food) for (birds ; animals) in an ecosystem. if a tree is cut down then that tree will die. if an organism dies then the population of that organism will decrease. death means to die. a tree is a kind of plant. a plant is a kind of organism. 
food is a source of energy for (animals ; plants). a human is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. an organism requires energy for (growth ; repair). (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. one can get something from a source. 
water is a kind of substance. substances are made of matter. 
harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. garbage means waste. waste has a negative impact on the environment. impact means effect. a stream is a kind of body of water. a body of water is a kind of environment. humans discarding waste in an environment causes harm to that environment. to discard means to throw away. 
each season occurs once per year. when the season changes , the amount of daylight will change. amount is similar to number. daylight hours means time during which there is daylight. hours are a kind of unit for measuring time. 
soil erosion is when (wind ; moving water ; gravity) move soil from (fields ; environments). soil is made of very small (rocks ; minerals). a landslide is when (water ; gravity) rapidly moves rocks or soil downhill especially after a rain storm. landslides often occur on mountains. (erosion ; storms) can cause a landslide. sliding is a kind of motion. soil erosion is a kind of (slow ; natural) process. 
centimeters ( cm ) are a unit used for measuring (length ; distance) generally used for values between 1 and 250. measuring is used for describing an object. 
texture is a property of (surfaces ; materials ; objects) and includes ordered values of (smooth ; rough). smooth is a kind of texture. a surface is a part of an object. 
skills are learned characteristics. a car is a kind of vehicle. driving is a kind of skill for operating a vehicle. a behavior is a kind of characteristic. 
Matter in the liquid phase has definite volume. volume is a property of matter. 
white is a kind of color. a white object reflects all visible light. a shirt is a kind of article of clothing. an article of clothing is a kind of object. amount is a property of something and includes ordered values of (none ; least ; little ; some ; half ; much ; many ; most ; all). a sunny day has lots of sunlight. sunlight is a kind of light. 
(gravity ; gravitational force) causes (objects that have mass ; substances) (to be pulled down ; to fall) on a planet. low means down. the bottom is the lowest part of something. the ground is at the bottom of an area. a ball is a kind of object. 
metal is sometimes magnetic. a magnet attracts (magnetic metals ; ferromagnetic metals) through magnetism. a nail is a kind of object. 
a nest is used for protecting young by birds. nest building is a kind of adaptation. birds build nests in the spring. spring is a kind of season. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). helping something has a positive impact on that something. protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). 
decomposition is when a decomposer breaks down dead organisms. a decomposer is a kind of living thing. 
to turn means to change. snow falls during the winter in the arctic environment. snow is white in color. An example of camouflage is when something changes color in order to have the same color as its environment. white is a kind of color. brown is a kind of color. the arctic is a kind of environment. fur is often part of an animal. a fox is a kind of animal. if an animal 's fur is a color then that animal is that color. 
sulfur is yellow in color. sulfur is a kind of mineral. 
no light shines through an opaque object. opacity is a property of an object and includes ordered values of (opaque ; translucent ; transparent). 
sedimentary rocks are made of small particles. sand is made of small particles. size is a property of objects and includes ordered values of (microscopic ; tiny ; small ; medium ; large). sedimentary rocks are often light brown in color. characteristic means property. color is a property of (an object ; a material). a rock is a kind of object. 
all cells perform cellular respiration. cellular respiration is when a cell converts from oxygen and carbohydrates into carbon dioxide, water, and energy. food contains carbohydrates. converting is similar to releasing. releasing energy is a kind of function. function is similar to purpose. 
photosynthesis is a kind of process. photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. carbon dioxide can be found in the air. green plants provide food for (themselves ; animals ; consumers) by performing photosynthesis. 
(to slow ; to slow down) decreases speed. pushing an object requires force. as the speed of an object increases , the force that object exerts will increase. as the mass of an object increases , the force required to push that object will increase. flowing liquid can push objects. water is a kind of liquid. faster means (an increase ; higher) in speed. larger means (greater ; higher ; more) in size. increase means more. mass is similar to size. a river is a kind of flowing body of water. a stream is a kind of body of water. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. a particle is a kind of object. liquid carrying an object means liquid pushing an object. 
a prism is used for refracting light. a prism is a kind of tool for refracting light. a prism refracts light. refraction is when a wave (goes through ; transmits through ; passes through) (a surface ; a material ; an object) and travels in a different direction relative to the angle of incidence. light is a kind of wave. sunlight is a kind of light. refracting (sunlight ; light) causes (sunlight ; light) to split into different colors. sunlight is made of all colors in the rainbow. 
a plant cell is a kind of cell. chloroplast is a part of a plant cell. a plant cell contains chloroplasts. 
wind causes erosion. soil erosion means soil loss through (wind ; water ; animals). soil erosion is a kind of (slow ; natural) process. soil is found on the surface of the Earth. loss is a kind of change. 
gravity is a kind of force. (gravity ; gravitational force) causes (objects that have mass ; substances) (to be pulled down ; to fall) on a planet. a ball is a kind of object. to cause means to make. downward means down. pulling is a kind of motion. falling means moving downward. rolling is a kind of motion. downward means down. 
mineral graphite is used for making pencil lead. pencil lead contains mineral graphite. 
the sun causes water to evaporate more quickly by adding heat. if a liquid disappears then that liquid probably evaporated. water is a kind of liquid. a puddle is a kind of body of water. if a body of water loses all water then that body of water does not exist any more. if there is a loss of something then that something decreases. evaporation causes amount of water to decrease. 
a swimming pool contains water. water is an (electrical ; electric energy ; thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. sending electricity through a conductor causes (electricity ; electric current) to flow through that conductor. nervous system is an (electrical ; electric) conductor. if one electrical conductor contacts another electrical conductor then electricity will flow through both conductors. the nervous system is a part of the body of an animal. if electricity (flows through ; is transferred through) the body of an animal then that animal is electrocuted. electrocution causes harm to an organism. an animal is a kind of organism. harm means danger. electric devices require electrical energy to function. device means tool. 
pollination is when (pollinating animals ; wind ; water) carry pollen from one flower to another flower. An insect is a pollinating animal. (plant reproduction ; seed production) requires pollination. if something is required for a process then that something positively impacts that process. helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
An example of an adaptation is camel humps. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). well-suited is similar to adapted. an animal needs to eat food for nutrients. an animal requires enough nutrients to (maintain good health ; survive). a desert environment contains very little food. an animal can survive in an environment with little food by storing fat. a camel is a kind of animal. a desert is a kind of environment. animals adapt to their environment. 
a complex machine is made of more than one simple machine. a bicycle contains (levers ; wheels and axles ; pulleys ; screws). a lever is a kind of simple machine. a pulley is a kind of simple machine. a wheel and axle is a kind of simple machine. a screw is a kind of simple machine. 
doing chores is a learned characteristic. pulling a plow is a kind of chore. inherited characteristics are the opposite of (learned characteristics ; acquired characteristics). an instinctive behavior is a kind of (inherited characteristic ; behavioral adaptation). 
the (color of ; coloration of) fur is an inherited characteristic. the colors of the parts of an organism are inherited characteristics. trait is synonymous with characteristic. fur is often part of an animal. a dog is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). 
seals every year return to the same beaches to give birth. if humans disturb animals in a location then those animals will move to a different location. a seal is a kind of animal. a beach is a kind of location. 
clouds are made of water vapor. water is in the gas state , called water vapor , for temperatures between (373 ; 212 ; 100) and 100000000000 (K ; F ; C). fog is formed by water vapor condensing in the air. 
some adult animals lay eggs. a frog is a kind of animal. An example of reproduction is laying eggs. reproduction occurs during adulthood. adulthood is a stage in the life cycle process. 
nuclear reactions in stars causes stars to produce (light ; energy ; nuclear energy). a star is a source of (light ; light energy) through nuclear reactions. the Sun is a kind of star. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. 
a scar is an acquired characteristic. inherited characteristics are the opposite of (learned characteristics ; acquired characteristics). inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). (children ; young) is synonymous with offspring. 
freezing point means temperature (at which a liquid freezes ; below which a liquid freezes). freezing means changing from a liquid into a solid by reducing heat energy. temperature is a measure of heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. a freezer is used for cooling things. (cooling ; colder) means (removing ; reducing ; decreasing) (heat ; temperature). liquid is a kind of state of matter. solid is a kind of state of matter. state of matter is a kind of property. 
running requires a lot of energy. as energy required for an activity increases , (pulse ; breathing rate) will increase. an increase is a kind of change. 
magnetism can cause objects to repel each other. 
if fossils of a water animal or plant are found in a place then that animal or plant used to live in that place. if fossils of a water animal or plant are found in a place then that place used to be covered by water in the past. an ocean is a kind of body of water. a fish lives in water. 
a fly is a kind of insect. an insect has six legs. an insect is a kind of animal. 
an electric fan is a kind of electrical device for (cooling ; ventilation). electricity is used as an energy source by electrical devices. a ceiling fan is a kind of fan. to run on means to use as an energy source. 
a desert environment has low rainfall. 
greatest means (largest ; highest ; most). (temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). hot means high in (heat energy ; temperature). as temperature increases , the ability of that liquid to dissolve solids will increase. high is similar to increase. water is a kind of liquid. sugar is a kind of solid. 
photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. green plants provide food for (themselves ; animals ; consumers) by performing photosynthesis. photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. solar energy is a kind of energy. the sun is the source of solar energy called sunlight. sunlight means solar energy. sunlight is a kind of solar energy. 
condensation is when change from a gas into a liquid by reducing heat energy. 
the ocean contains large amounts of salt water. sea means ocean. animals usually require removing salt from water for drinking. 
skin is used for protecting the body from harmful substances. protecting is a kind of function. 
rain is a kind of water. a (plants ; living things) require water for (survival ; to grow). if members of a species are (born ; survive) then the population of that species increases. increase means more. species means a group of like organisms. a plant is a kind of organism. as the amount of rainfall increases in an area , the amount of available water in that area will increase. rainfall is the amount of rain an area receives. habitat is similar to environment. an environment means an area. as the available water in an environment increases , the populations of organisms in that environment will increase. 
reading requires seeing. requiring is similar to needing help. a light bulb is used for seeing in the dark. reading is a kind of activity. inventing a tool (allows ; enables) that tool to be used. a light bulb is a kind of tool for seeing in the dark. 
fast means quickly. an airplane is fast in speed. travel means to move. travelling quickly has a positive impact on a person 's life. a positive impact is a benefit. 
a deer is a kind of animal. if a habitat is destroyed then that habitat can not support animals. if a habitat is removed then that habitat is destroyed. removing forests means removing animal habitats. if a habitat can no longer support animals then those animals will move to another area. removing a forest means cutting down a forest. a deer lives in a forest. (organisms ; living things) live in (their habitat ; their home). an animal is a kind of organism. 
to be used for something means to help to do that something. fast means quickly. an airplane is fast in speed. travel means to move. a airplane is used for moving (people ; products) (across bodies of water ; to far away places). inventing a tool (allows ; enables) that tool to be used. a vehicle is a kind of tool for (travel ; transport). an airplane is a kind of vehicle. 
as roughness of a surface increases , friction will increase. a surface is a part of an object. a paper is a kind of object. paper is a kind of material. 
eyes are usually part of an animal for seeing. an insect is a kind of animal. an insect usually has a small size. an part of an object is smaller than the entire object. magnifying glass is used to see small things by making objects appear bigger. (a hand lens ; a magnifying lens) is synonymous with a magnifying glass. an animal is a kind of living thing. a living thing is a kind of object. 
habitat is similar to environment. An example of camouflage is when something (is ; has) the same color as its environment. to match means to be the same. camouflage is a kind of protection (against predators ; from predators ; against consumers). a lizard is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. if an animal 's skin is a certain color then that animal is that color. color is a property of (an object ; a material). an organism is a living thing. a living thing is a kind of object. characteristic means property. a predator is a kind of enemy to its prey. 
decomposition is when a decomposer breaks down dead organisms. decomposition is when a decomposer (recycles ; returns) nutrients from dead organisms to the soil by eating those dead organisms. a plant is a kind of organism. a tree is a kind of plant. a leaf is a part of a tree. 
soil is made of very small (rocks ; minerals). some minerals are sometimes nutrients. soil contains nutrients for plants. a (plant ; living thing) requires nutrients to grow. soil is a renewable resource for growing plants. 
paper is recyclable. paper is a kind of material. recyclable means a material can be recycled. 
animals usually require removing salt from water for drinking. requiring is similar to needing help. person is synonymous with human. a human is a kind of animal. sea means ocean. the ocean contains large amounts of salt water. 
a (mountain ; hill) is taller than the land around it. 
melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. (boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. ice is a kind of solid. ice is a kind of food. a (pan ; frying pan) is a kind of container for (cooking ; food). a container contains (objects ; material ; substances). if a container contains something then that container touches that something. if (one surface ; one substance ; one object) touches something then one is exposed to that something. if (a thermal conductor ; an object) is exposed to a source of heat then (that conductor ; that object) may become (hot ; warm). water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). water is an (electrical ; electric energy ; thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. (pot ; pan ; frying pan) is made of metal for cooking. metal is a (thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. heat energy is synonymous with thermal energy. hot means high in (heat energy ; temperature). high is similar to increase. to add means to increase. fire gives off (light ; heat ; smoke). to give off means to be the source of. a flame are a part of a fire. if something is places over a heat source then that something is exposed to that heat source. 
soil is formed by weathering. (rocks ; soil ; materials) interacting with (wind ; moving water) over long periods of time causes weathering. weathering means breaking down (rocks ; surface materials) from larger whole into smaller pieces by weather. soil is made of very small (rocks ; minerals). a process is a kind of event. weathering is a kind of process. 
new land can be formed by volcanoes erupting by lava cooling. volcanoes are often found under oceans. a volcanic eruption is a kind of quick process. 
a (mountain ; hill) is taller than the land around it. a mountain is taller than a hill. a mountain is a kind of landform. 
wood is usually sturdy. furniture often is made of wood. a table is a kind of furniture. wood is a kind of natural material. best means most positive. using sturdy materials to build furniture has a positive impact on the use of that furniture. 
a gram is a kind of unit for measuring mass. grams ( g ) are a unit used for measuring (mass ; weight) generally used for values between 1 and 2000. (mass ; weight) is a property of (matter ; objects ; materials). 
freezing means changing from a liquid into a solid by reducing heat energy. temperature is a measure of heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. to reduce means to decrease. water is in the liquid state , called liquid water , for temperatures between (273 ; 32 ; 0) and (373 ; 212 ; 100) (K ; F ; C). water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). 
a thermometer is a kind of instrument for measuring temperature. a thermometer is used to measure temperature. instrument means tool. measuring is a kind of observing. 
fire causes burning. fire is a kind of chemical reaction. chemical reactions cause (new substances ; different substances) to form. 
(matter ; materials ; substances) are made of (atoms ; particles). composed of means made of. composition is a property of (an object ; matter). 
Matter in the solid phase has definite shape. an eraser is a kind of solid. (variability of shape ; variability of volume) is a property of matter and includes values of (variable ; definite). 
Matter in the solid phase has definite shape. freezing means changing from a liquid into a solid by reducing heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. (variability of shape ; variability of volume) is a property of matter and includes values of (variable ; definite). 
matter with variable volume and shape (assumes ; expands to fill ; takes) the shape and size of its entire container. air is a kind of gas. Matter in the gas phase has variable shape. variable means able to change. a beach ball contains gas. a beach ball is flexible. a container contains (objects ; material ; substances). gas is a kind of substance. if a flexible container is pushed on then that container will change shape. 
a landslide is when (water ; gravity) rapidly moves rocks or soil downhill especially after a rain storm. (erosion ; storms) can cause a landslide. movement is a kind of change. when a body of water receives more water than it can hold , a flood occurs. (storms ; rain) cause bodies of water to increase amount of water they contain. increase means more. flooding is a kind of change. 
drought means available water decreases in an environment. when a body of water receives more water than it can hold , a flood occurs. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. increase means more. amount is a property of something and includes ordered values of (none ; least ; little ; some ; half ; much ; many ; most ; all). 
the arctic environment is covered in snow. snow is white in color. an environment means an area. An example of camouflage is when something (is ; has) the same color as its environment. camouflage is used for (protection ; hiding) by (prey ; animals) (against predators ; from predators). a rabbit is a kind of animal. a fox is a kind of animal. to protect means to make safe. . the arctic environment is white in color from being covered in snow. 
some raccoons live in hollow logs. a shelter is used for living in by animals. a raccoon is a kind of animal. 
cold means low in temperature. to lower means to decrease. to reduce means to decrease. temperature is a measure of heat energy. freezing means changing from a liquid into a solid by reducing heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. something in a cold place becomes cold. 
An example of using tools is a chimpanzee digging for insects with a stick. a termite is a kind of insect. using tools is a learned characteristic. a behavior is a kind of characteristic. 
the (color of ; coloration of) fur is an inherited characteristic. the colors of the parts of an organism are inherited characteristics. fur is often part of an animal. a tiger is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. coloration means a pattern of colors. striped is a kind of color pattern. inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). 
a ball field is (open ; grassy). bluebirds live in (open spaces ; grassy spaces). 
heat is a kind of energy. the sun is the source of energy for physical cycles on Earth. to give off means to be the source of. evaporation is a stage in the water cycle process. a step in a process means a stage in a process. 
the sun transfers (solar energy ; light energy ; heat energy) from itself to the (planets ; Earth) through sunlight. transferring is similar to giving. 
landslides often occur on mountains. 
wildfire is when a forest catches fire. fire causes harm (to trees ; to forests ; to living things). a deer is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. killing means harming something causing death. a deer lives in a forest. woodland means forest. natural disasters can cause animals to leave an environment. a wildfire is a kind of natural disaster. a forest is a kind of environment. 
an otter is a kind of aquatic animal. aquatic (animals ; plants) live in bodies of water. an (aquatic animal ; aquatic plant) requires great amounts of water to (survive ; thrive). when a body of water receives more water than it can hold , a flood occurs. heavy rains cause flooding. amount is a property of something and includes ordered values of (none ; least ; little ; some ; half ; much ; many ; most ; all). 
low means low in (elevation ; height ; altitude). to lower means to decrease. as elevation of a place decreases , how much a flood will affect that place will increases. an environment means an area. organisms are a part of an environment. an animal is a kind of organism. a plant is a kind of organism. 
inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). (children ; young) is synonymous with offspring. eye color is an inherited characteristic. the colors of the parts of an organism are inherited characteristics. eyes are usually part of an animal for seeing. an eagle is a kind of bird. a bird is a kind of animal. 
a drought occurs over a period of (months ; years). a drought is a kind of slow environmental change. 
population is a measure of the number of a species in an environment. when a body of water receives more water than it can hold , a flood occurs. an (aquatic animal ; aquatic plant) requires great amounts of water to (survive ; thrive). aquatic (animals ; plants) live in bodies of water. as water increases in an environment , the population of aquatic animals will increase. increase means more. flooding is a kind of change. 
a revolution is when something revolves around something else. revolving around something means orbiting that something. the Earth revolves around the sun. 
friction causes the temperature of an object to increase. temperature is a measure of heat energy. heat means heat energy. friction is a kind of force. if something causes an increase in something else then that something produces that something else. 
sound is a kind of energy. when two objects (are touched ; are contacted ; move against each other) , sound is produced. wood is a kind of object. a sheet of sandpaper is a kind of object. heat means heat energy. temperature is a measure of heat energy. friction causes the temperature of an object to increase. friction occurs when two object 's surfaces move against each other. (to rub ; to rub together) means to move against. a surface is a part of an object. rubbing against something is a kind of contact. a type is synonymous with a kind. 
dry means low in (amount of water ; wetness ; moisture). as moisture of an object decreases , the friction of that object against another object will increase. moisture means (liquid ; liquid water). wet is the opposite of dry. friction causes the temperature of an object to increase. temperature is a measure of heat energy. heat means heat energy. friction occurs when two object 's surfaces move against each other. (to rub ; to rub together) means to move against. a hand is a part of the body. a body part is a kind of object. (warm ; becoming warm) means heat is added. to add means to increase. if something causes an increase in something else then that something produces that something else. 
oil is a kind of liquid. moisture means (liquid ; liquid water). as moisture of an object decreases , the friction of that object against another object will increase. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. to reduce means to decrease. friction causes the temperature of an object to increase. temperature is a measure of heat energy. heat means heat energy. if something causes an increase in something else then that something produces that something else. 
heat means heat energy. heat energy is synonymous with thermal energy. a thermal energy conductor transfers heat from (warmer objects ; hotter objects) to cooler objects. water is an (electrical ; electric energy ; thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. (steam ; water vapor) is a kind of water above 100 degrees celsius. cooking food requires adding heat energy. steam is hot in temperature. a hot substance is a source of heat. a source of heat can be used to heat something. 
a plant is a kind of living thing. roots are a vehicle for absorbing water and nutrients from soil into the plant. dirt means soil. soil contains nutrients for plants. roots anchor plants into the soil. an (animal ; living thing) requires nutrients for survival. 
roots are a vehicle for absorbing water and nutrients from soil into the plant. some minerals are sometimes nutrients. iron is a kind of mineral. take in means absorb. roots are a part of a (plant ; tree). soil contains nutrients for plants. 
a plant stem is the vehicle for transporting water and food from roots to the rest of the plant. transport means (to move ; to make travel). 
flowers are a source of fruit. some flowers become fruits. 
a skeletal system is a part of an animal for (providing support ; providing shape ; providing protection). the skeletal system protects internal organs. internal organs are a part of the body. protecting is a kind of function. providing is a kind of function. function means job. 
muscles (push ; pull) bones to move the bones. 
a glacier is a kind of body of water. a glacier is made of ice. ice is cold in temperature. cold temperatures usually have a negative impact on organisms. a plant is a kind of organism. an animal is a kind of organism. cold environments contain few organisms. 
a glacier is made of ice. ice is cold in temperature. water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). 
pine needle is similar to a leaf. a leaf performs (photosynthesis ; gas exchange). green plants provide food for (themselves ; animals ; consumers) by performing photosynthesis. provide is similar to (give ; make). a pine tree is a kind of tree. a tree is a kind of plant. a needle is a part of a pine tree. 
green plants provide food for (themselves ; animals ; consumers) by performing photosynthesis. provide is similar to (give ; make). a leaf performs (photosynthesis ; gas exchange). photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. a plant requires sunlight for photosynthesis. sunlight shining means sunlight is provided. 
feeders attract animals to a location. a deer is a kind of animal. a road is a kind of location. if an animal is near a road then that animal might be killed by a car. killing means harming something causing death. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. attracting something to a location causes that something to be near that location. protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). 
the tundra is very cold in temperature. the tundra is a kind of environment. an environment means an area. 
a ruler is used for measuring the length of an object. diameter is a measure of length through the center of a circle. a ruler is a kind of tool for measuring length. a dime is a kind of coin. a coin is a kind of object. 
(boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. temperature is a measure of heat energy. if (an object ; something) is in the sunlight then (that object ; that something) will absorb solar energy. if (an object ; a substance) absorbs solar energy then (that object ; that substance) will increase in temperature. to add means to increase. sunshine means sunlight. 
clouds are made of water vapor. (steam ; water vapor) is a kind of water above 100 degrees celsius. rain is a kind of water. clouds produce rain. water vapor condensing in clouds causes rain. to be made of is similar to collection. 
snow is a kind of ice. water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). water is a kind of liquid. freezing means changing from a liquid into a solid by reducing heat energy. freezing point means temperature (at which a liquid freezes ; below which a liquid freezes). state means form. 
recycling (reduces ; decreases) the amount of water sent to landfills. trash is synonymous with waste. 
weathering means breaking down (rocks ; surface materials) from larger whole into smaller pieces by weather. ice wedging is a kind of mechanical weathering. ice wedging is when ice causes rocks to crack by expanding in openings. water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). water is a kind of liquid. freezing means changing from a liquid into a solid by reducing heat energy. (temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). cold means low in temperature. to lower means to decrease. to reduce means to decrease. temperature is a measure of heat energy. cycles of freezing and thawing water cause ice wedging. 
reproduction is a stage in the life cycle process. different organisms reproduce differently. a plant is a kind of organism. 
a plant is a kind of living thing. living things can all reproduce. a tree is a kind of plant. a redwood tree is a kind of tree. a flower is a part of a plant for (attracting pollinators ; producing seeds). a black-eyed Susan wildflower is a kind of flower. 
seeds may sprout when buried in soil. an acorn is a kind of seed. may happen means having a chance of happening. 
seed dispersal is when the seeds of a plant (are moved ; are carried ; are spread ; are dropped ; ) from the parent plant to another area. (birds ; some animals) are a vehicle for spreading the seeds of a plant. plant requires seed dispersal for reproduction. if seeds stick to the fur of an animal then that seed will be transported by the animal. a vehicle is used for transportation. seed dispersal has a positive impact on (a plant ; a plant 's reproduction). helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
a skinny beak is used for obtaining food by a bird from small spaces. (to help ; to benefit) means to be of use. to help means to aid. a beak is a part of a bird. a part of something means a characteristic of something. 
photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. a leaf performs (photosynthesis ; gas exchange). a leaf is a part of a tree. a tree is a kind of plant. a leaf absorbs sunlight to perform photosynthesis. take in means absorb. 
landfills have a negative impact on the (environment ; communities). less is similar to decrease. recycling (reduces ; decreases) the amount of water sent to landfills. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. a positive impact is a benefit. 
sunlight is a kind of solar energy. solar energy is a kind of energy. photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. a plant requires sunlight for photosynthesis. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. a source of something supplies that something. 
a meter stick is a kind of tool for (measuring length ; measuring distance). a meter stick is used to measure (distance ; height ; length). 
a balance is a kind of instrument for (measuring mass ; measuring weight). a balance is used for measuring (mass ; weight) (of an object ; of a substance). (mass ; weight) is a property of (matter ; objects ; materials). frosting is a kind of material. 
to change means to have an effect. as force exerted on an object increases , distance travelled will increase. if an object is kicked then force is exerted on that object. a ball is a kind of object. an increase is a kind of change. 
Galileo Galilei made improvements to the telescope to make better observations of celestial bodies. a telescope is a kind of instrument for (observing celestial objects ; observing the sky). a telescope is used for observing (stars ; planets ; moons ; distant objects ; the sky ; celestial objects). 
photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. carbon dioxide can be found in the air. 
a meter stick is used to measure (distance ; height ; length). length is a property of the shape of an object. 
gravity is a kind of force. (gravity ; gravitational force) causes (objects that have mass ; substances) (to be pulled down ; to fall) on a planet. low means down. the bottom is the lowest part of something. the ground is at the bottom of an area. 
a thermometer is a kind of instrument for measuring temperature. a thermometer is used to measure temperature. instrument means tool. a type is synonymous with a kind. 
illness has a negative impact on an organism 's health. an animal is a kind of organism. a human is a kind of animal. person is synonymous with human. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. protecting something means preventing harm to that something. protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. helping something has a positive impact on that something. vaccines can help prevent illness. 
rust forming is a kind of chemical change. a type is synonymous with a kind. 
(boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. liquid is a kind of state of matter. gas is a kind of state of matter. water is a kind of matter. 
degrees celsius ( C ) is a unit used for measuring temperature generally used for values between -273 and 50000000. 
kilograms ( kg ) are a unit used for measuring (mass ; weight) generally used for values between 1 and 50000000. a scale is used for measuring weight. weight is a kind of property. 
(boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. a stove generates heat for cooking usually. if (a thermal conductor ; an object) is exposed to a source of heat then (that conductor ; that object) may become (hot ; warm). (pot ; pan ; frying pan) is made of metal for cooking. metal is a (thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. a thermal conductor is made of materials that conduct thermal energy. metal is a kind of material. conductivity is a property of a (material ; substance). if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. a (pan ; frying pan) is a kind of container for (cooking ; food). a container is a kind of object. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. a container contains (objects ; material ; substances). if a container contains something then that container touches that something. being (on something ; placed in something ; placed over something) means touching that something. if (one surface ; one substance ; one object) touches something then one is exposed to that something. 
(to slow ; to slow down) decreases speed. as roughness of a surface increases , friction will increase. carpet has a rough surface. wood has a smooth surface. rough is the opposite of smooth. friction acts to counter the motion of two objects when their surfaces are touching. counter means (reduce ; stop ; resist). to reduce means to decrease. a surface is a part of an object. a car is a kind of vehicle. a wheeled vehicle requires smooth surfaces. wheels are a part of a car. if a wheel travels on a surface then the wheel touches that surface. 
plants absorb (nutrients ; water ; oxygen) from soil into themselves through their roots. roots are a vehicle for absorbing water and nutrients from soil into the plant. roots are a part of a (plant ; tree). 
renewable resources can be used over again. water is a renewable resource. 
eye color is an inherited characteristic. brown is a kind of color. feature is synonymous with characteristic. the colors of the parts of an organism are inherited characteristics. eyes are usually part of an animal for seeing. a deer is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). 
soil erosion is when (wind ; moving water ; gravity) move soil from (fields ; environments). flowing is a kind of motion. a river is a kind of flowing body of water. a body of water is a kind of environment. when a body of water receives more water than it can hold , a flood occurs. 
photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. sunlight is a kind of light. a plant light is used for help plants by mimicking sunlight. 
humans changing (ecosystems ; environments) usually has a negative impact on an (ecosystem ; organisms living in an ecosystem). humans changing an environment causes animal populations to decrease in that environment. a meadow is a kind of environment. a rabbit is a kind of animal. a farmer is a kind of human. farming is when a human plants crops for food. a farmer farms (crops ; plants) for food. farming changes the environment. an environment means an area. fruit trees are a kind of crop. 
photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. a leaf performs (photosynthesis ; gas exchange). missing is similar to less. an plant requires food for survival. having food has a positive impact on an organism 's health. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. to hurt means to harm. a plant is a kind of organism. 
as the population of prey decreases , competition between predators will increase. a deer is a kind of prey. a bobcat is a kind of predator. a panther is a kind of predator. 
a planet rotating causes cycles of day and night on that planet. Earth is a kind of planet. the Earth rotates on its axis on its axis. 
a sticky tongue is a kind of adaptation for catching insects. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). helping something has a positive impact on that something. a frog is a kind of amphibian. a salamander is a kind of amphibian. an amphibian is a kind of animal. if two animals eat the same prey then those animals compete for that pey. a frog eats insects. a salamander eats insects. an insect is a kind of prey. 
to be used for something means to help to do that something. a microscope is a kind of tool for observing small things. microscope is used to see (small things ; microscopic things ; specimens) by making them appear bigger. as the size of an object appears larger , that object will (be seen ; be observed) (more easily ; better). scientists make observations. 
a tree is a source of (shelter ; food) for (birds ; animals) in an ecosystem. an oak is a kind of tree. 
a forest environment receives more rainfall than a desert. as available water decreases , the population of plants will decrease. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. increase means more. rainfall is the amount of rain an area receives. a forest is a kind of environment. a desert is a kind of environment. an environment means an area. as the amount of rainfall increases in an area , the amount of available water in that area will increase. population increase means more survive. rain is a kind of water. a (plants ; living things) require water for (survival ; to grow). 
(meters ; centimeters ; kilometers) are used to (describe distance ; describe length). (measures of length ; measures of distance) are used to measure the amount of rainfall. rainfall is the amount of rain an area receives. a centimeter is a kind of unit of measurement. an area receiving rain means rain falling in that area. 
digestion is when stomach acid breaks down food. bacteria can help digest food in humans. a human is a kind of animal. helping bodily processes has a positive impact on (an animal ; an animal 's health). digestion is a kind of bodily process. to be good for means to have a positive impact on. helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. sunlight means solar energy. summer has the most sunlight. a plant requires sunlight for photosynthesis. a producer produces its own food. make means produce. 
photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. green plants are a kind of producer. photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. In the photosynthesis process (carbon dioxide ; water ; sunlight) has the role of raw material. if something is a raw material in a process then that something is required for that process. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. photosynthesis is a kind of process. sunlight means solar energy. 
pair means two. charge is a property of (an object ; a material ; a substance) and includes ordered values of (negatively-charged ; neutral ; positively-charged). if (two objects ; two materials) have the same charge then (those two objects ; those two materials) will repel each other. an object is an item. plastic is a kind of material made by humans. cloth is a kind of material. a strip is a kind of object. a piece of something is a kind of object. if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. 
an animal is a kind of living thing. bats can echolocate. echolocation is when some animals detect objects by hearing echoes by emitting sound. a bat is a kind of animal. emit means send out. hearing is used for sensing sound by animals. an echo is a kind of sound. prey is a kind of animal. a living thing is a kind of object. finding something requires sensing that something. 
the moon reflects sunlight towards the Earth. the sun is a source of (light ; light energy) called sunlight. where something comes from is a source of that something. 
if an object reflects light toward the eye then that object can be seen. visible means able to be seen. can be means able to be. shiny (things ; objects) reflect light. a balloon is a kind of object. metallic is similar to shiny. eyes are used for seeing by animals by sensing light. 
as an object moves , the kinetic energy of that object will increase. a ball is a kind of object. a roll is a kind of movement. 
a (pan ; frying pan) is a kind of container for (cooking ; food). a container is a kind of object. a thermal insulator can be used to remove hot objects from a heat source. removing hot objects from a heat source requires thermal insulators. an oven is a source of heat. to serve as means to be used as. 
electricity can not flow through an open circuit. electricity means electrical energy. not allowed to means can not. electrical current means electrical energy. 
photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. sugar is a kind of simple carbohydrate. green plants provide food for (themselves ; animals ; consumers) by performing photosynthesis. make means produce. to provide something means to be the source of that something. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. 
An example of seed dispersal is is an animal (hiding ; gathering ; burying) seeds. plant requires seed dispersal for reproduction. seed dispersal is when the seeds of a plant are moved from the plant to a new environment. a tree is a kind of plant. nuts are a kind of fruit. fruit contains seeds. a squirrel is a kind of animal. helping something has a positive impact on that something. seed dispersal has a positive impact on (a plant ; a plant 's reproduction). 
a female insect lays eggs during the adult stage of an insect 's life cycle. 
a structure is a kind of feature. feature is synonymous with characteristic. a structure of something is synonymous with a part of that something. layers of fat are often a part of animals that live in cold climates. fat is used to keep animals warm. an animal can survive in an environment with little food by storing fat. cold environments usually have little food for animals. a climate is synonymous with an environment. if the (environmental temperature ; air temperature) is too cold then (an animal ; a living thing) in that environment may become cold. an animal is a kind of living thing. if a living thing becomes too cold then that living thing will die. keeping warm is the opposite of becoming cold. (nonliving ; non-living ; die) is the opposite of (living ; alive ; live). 
a glacier moves slowly. a glacier is made of a large buildup of (ice ; snow). 
the (freezing point of water ; melting point of water) is (32F ; 0C ; 273K). oxygen is a kind of element. iron is a kind of element. elements are a kind of substance. the melting point of iron is (2800F ; 1538C ; 1811K). the melting point of oxygen is (-361.8F ; -218.8C ; 54.4K). water is a kind of substance. 
cooking food to proper temperatures protects against food poisoning by killing bacteria and viruses. if food is cooked then heat energy is added to that food. heat means heat energy. (bacteria ; viruses) cause food poisoning. illness has a negative impact on an organism 's health. food poisoning is a kind of illness. if food is cooked then heat energy is added to that food. adding heat to something kills (viruses ; bacteria) in that something. if an organism dies then the population of that organism will decrease. a bacterium is a kind of organism. protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. an organism is a living thing. killing means harming something causing death. death means to die. decreasing something negative has a positive impact on a thing. 
In the food chain process a green plant has the role of producer. In the food chain process an animal has the role of consumer which eats (producers ; other animals) for food. green plants provide food for (themselves ; animals ; consumers) by performing photosynthesis. to produce means to provide. 
fossil means preserved remains of organisms. studying fossils is used to learn about organisms from long ago. preserved means (from the past ; from long ago). 
a Rotation of the Earth on (Earth 's axis ; itself) takes (1 ; one) day. one day is equal to 24 hours. a planet rotating causes cycles of day and night on that planet. 
a constellation contains stars. stars appear to move relative to the horizon during the night. shift means move. moving changes position. 
the type of seed of a plant is an inherited characteristic. inherited characteristics are the opposite of (learned characteristics ; acquired characteristics). an organism 's environment affects that organism 's acquired characteristics. a plant is a kind of organism. a bean plant is a kind of plant. trait is synonymous with characteristic. 
when the body is hot , sweat is produced to cool the body. sweat (cools ; helps to cool) a body. 
protein is used to repair cells by the human body. 
genes are a vehicle for passing inherited characteristics from parent to offspring. a vehicle transmits something. inherited characteristics are a kind of hereditary information. 
wood is an (electrical ; electrical energy ; thermal energy) insulator. a thermal insulator (slows ; prevents) the transfer of heat. wood is a kind of natural material. 
when an electrical conductor is plugged into an outlet , a circuit is completed. a complete electrical circuit is a source of electrical energy. electricity means electrical energy. safe is the opposite of (harm ; danger). plugging many appliances into one outlet is dangerous. to be in danger means (to be around ; to be near) something dangerous. electrocution causes harm to an organism. if electricity (flows through ; is transferred through) the body of an animal then that animal is electrocuted. an animal is a kind of organism. 
fire causes burning. fire is a kind of chemical reaction. chemical reactions cause chemical change. 
a cell wall provides (support ; protection ; shape ; structure) for a plant cell. a cell wall is a part of a plant cell for supporting and protecting the cell membrane. an onion is a kind of vegetable. a vegetable is a kind of plant. a plant cell is box-like in shape. microscope is used to see (small things ; microscopic things ; specimens) by making them appear bigger. a cell is very small. little means small. 
clouds are formed by water vapor rising and condensing. condensing means changing from a gas into a liquid by reducing heat energy. water is in the gas state , called water vapor , for temperatures between (373 ; 212 ; 100) and 100000000000 (K ; F ; C). 
the Earth revolving around the sun causes stars to appear in different areas in the sky at different times of year. revolving around something means orbiting that something. different seasons occur during different times of the year. moving changes position. revolving is a kind of motion. 
an instinctive behavior is a kind of (inherited characteristic ; behavioral adaptation). inherited characteristics are the opposite of (learned characteristics ; acquired characteristics). skills are learned characteristics. animal instinct means instinctive behavior. 
a solar eclipse could only happen during the new moon. a new moon is a kind of phase of the moon. take place means happen. 
greatest means (largest ; highest ; most). far means great in distance. as distance to a city decreases , the amount of light pollution will increase. as light pollution increases , seeing the stars will be harder. a telescope is used for observing (stars ; planets ; moons ; distant objects ; the sky ; celestial objects). an increase is the opposite of a decrease. observe means see. 
push is a kind of (force ; application of force). a pull is a kind of force. a kind of something is an example of that something. 
detailed observation of celestial objects requires a telescope. a planet is a kind of celestial (object ; body). inventing a tool (allows ; enables) that tool to be used. a telescope is a kind of instrument for (observing celestial objects ; observing the sky). instrument means tool. 
processes sometimes produce waste products. In the (cellular respiration ; respiration) process carbon dioxide is a waste product. living things require respiration to use energy. an animal is a kind of living thing. cellular respiration is a kind of process. 
identical twins have all of the same inherited characteristics. inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). offspring receive genes from their parents through (inheritence ; DNA). 
natural selection occurs over a period of 1 to many generations which is considered a very long time to a human. to happen means to occur. 
speckled is a kind of color pattern. brown is a kind of color. color is a property of (an object ; a material). a property of something is a feature of that something. coloration means a pattern of colors. An example of camouflage is when something (is ; has) the same color as its environment. An example of camouflage is an organism looking like leaves. a bird is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. an organism is a living thing. a living thing is a kind of object. camouflage is a kind of protection (against predators ; from predators ; against consumers). predators eat prey. become prey means get eaten. leaves are sometimes brown in color. eating (an animal ; a plant) means killing (that animal ; that plant). protecting something means preventing harm to that something. killing means changing a living thing from alive to dead by harming. 
the gravitational pull of the Moon on Earth 's oceans causes the tides. pull is similar to attract. 
(matter ; molecules) vibrating can cause sound. objects are made of (materials ; substances ; matter). vibrating matter can produce sound. a string is a part of a guitar for producing sound. (plucking ; strumming) a string can cause that string to vibrate. a string is a kind of object. 
(an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). keeping warm is the opposite of becoming cold. if a living thing becomes too cold then that living thing will die. if the (environmental temperature ; air temperature) is too cold then (an animal ; a living thing) in that environment may become cold. blubber is a kind of fat. a walrus is a kind of sea mammal. blubber is often a part of sea mammals for keeping warm by providing thermal insulation. dying is the opposite of (living ; surviving). a body of water is a kind of environment. a mammal is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. layers of fat are often a part of animals that live in cold climates. a climate is synonymous with an environment. 
light enters the eye through the pupil. eyes are a part of a human for seeing. eyes can (sense ; detect) light energy for seeing. 
electrical current running through a wire causes that wire (to heat up ; to become warm). heat means temperature increases. an increase is a kind of change. when an electrical circuit is working properly , electrical current runs through (that circuit ; the wires in that circuit). a wire is a part of an electrical circuit for conducting electricity. electrical conduction is when (metals ; electrical conductors) conduct electricity through (a wire ; electrical conductor ; metal). 
a ruler is used for measuring the length of an object. a ruler is a kind of tool for measuring length. a butterfly is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. a living thing is a kind of object. 
a flashlight converts chemical energy into light energy. 
the length of the hair of an animal is an acquired characteristic. a human is a kind of animal. trait is synonymous with characteristic. inherited characteristics are the opposite of (learned characteristics ; acquired characteristics). long means great in length. 
safety goggles are used for protecting the eyes during experiments. 
(to slow ; to slow down) decreases speed. greatest means (largest ; highest ; most). as roughness of a surface increases , friction will increase. carpet has a rough surface. wood has a smooth surface. rough is the opposite of smooth. friction acts to counter the motion of two objects when their surfaces are touching. counter means (reduce ; stop ; resist). to reduce means to decrease. a surface is a part of an object. a car is a kind of vehicle. as the smoothness of something increases , the friction of that something will decrease when its surface moves against another surface. as the roughness of something increases , the friction of that something will increase when its surface moves against another surface. a vehicle is a kind of object. increase means more. a roll is a kind of movement. as force exerted on an object increases , distance travelled will increase. friction is a kind of force. friction exerts force on moving objects. far means great in distance. increase means more. 
the Moon completes a lunar cycle over a period of 29 days. length of time means period of time. 
the number of rings in a tree trunk can be used to estimate the age of the tree. 
wind is a renewable resource. oil is a nonrenewable resource. natural gas is a nonrenewable resource. . renewable is the opposite of nonrenewable. 
(fossil fuels ; fossils) forming occurs over a period of 300000000 years which is considered a very long time to a human. nonrenewable resources forming occurs over a period of 300000000 years which is considered a very long time to a human. 
water is in the gas state , called water vapor , for temperatures between (373 ; 212 ; 100) and 100000000000 (K ; F ; C). state means form. 
height is an inherited characteristic. inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). trait is synonymous with characteristic. 
water causes the most soil and rock erosion. 
(a hand lens ; a magnifying lens) is synonymous with a magnifying glass. a magnifying glass is a kind of tool for observing small things. magnifying glass is used to see small things by making objects appear bigger. an insect usually has a small size. observe means see. 
the floating arrow on a compass always points towards the north. 
safety goggles are used for protecting the eyes during experiments. an object is an item. goggles are a kind of object. chemical splashing can cause harm (to humans ; to the eyes). chemical splashing sometimes occurs during experiments. protecting something means preventing harm to that something. 
scales are used for protection by scaled animals. a fish is a kind of scaled animal. scales are a covering around the body of a scaled animal. a scale is hard. (something hard ; something strong) can be used for protection. 
solar energy is a renewable resource. large (canopies ; trees) block sunlight from reaching the ground. if a tree falls then sunlight becomes available to the surrounding plants. sunlight is a kind of solar energy. 
binoculars are a kind of instrument for observing distant objects. binoculars are used for observing distant objects. instrument means tool. animals usually distance themselves from humans. a bird is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. a living thing is a kind of object. distant means great in distance. (to help ; to benefit) means to be of use. 
a mirror reflects light. a mirror is a kind of reflective object. reflective obejcts cause objects to appear backwards. 
an insect usually has a small size. magnifying glass is used to see small things by making objects appear bigger. a magnifying glass is a kind of tool for observing small things. (a hand lens ; a magnifying lens) is synonymous with a magnifying glass. observe means see. 
the (lunar surface ; moon 's surface) contains many craters. to be found in means to be contained in. a crater is a kind of land feature. 
if a tree falls then that tree is dead. a tree is a kind of plant. a plant is a kind of organism. dead organisms are the source of nutrients for decomposers. removing dead organisms from an ecosystem causes available nutrients to be removed from that ecosystem. a (plant ; living thing) requires nutrients to grow. an (animal ; living thing) requires nutrients for survival. an animal is a kind of organism. organisms are a part of an environment. an environment is similar to an ecosystem. get rid of means (eliminate ; remove). requiring is similar to needing help. helping something has a positive impact on that something. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. 
low tide is a stage in the tide cycle process. high tide is a stage in the tide cycle process. the tide cycle regularly occurs twice per day. a tide is a kind of natural event. days are a kind of unit for measuring time. a unit for measuring time is a kind of time interval. 
dry means low in (amount of water ; wetness ; moisture). storing water increases the water available to organisms in a dry environment. a (plants ; living things) require water for (survival ; to grow). (animals ; living things) require water for survival. a plant is a kind of organism. an animal is a kind of organism. dry environments contain little water. little is similar to decrease. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. requiring is similar to needing help. as dryness increases in an environment , the available water in that environment will decrease. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). requiring is similar to needing help. helping something has a positive impact on that something. an adaptation is a kind of change. a plant is a member of a plant species. 
carpet absorbs sound. reflecting (light ; sound) is the opposite of absorbing (light ; sound). echo is when sound reflects off of a surface. carpet is a kind of material. a surface is a part of a material. 
earthquakes cause rock layers to fold on top of each other. earthquakes folding rock layers causes older rock to be on top of younger rock. younger rock is usually located under older rock. 
(igneous rocks ; minerals) are formed from (magma ; lava) cooling. cooling is a kind of process. 
carbon dioxide concentrations in the air have increased over the last decade dramatically. 
a desert environment has low rainfall. storing water is a kind of adaptation. adaptations are used for survival. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). a (plants ; living things) require water for (survival ; to grow). a cactus is a kind of plant. a cactus stores water. to store means to hold. as the amount of rainfall increases in an area , the amount of available water in that area will increase. to lower means to decrease. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. storing water increases the water available to organisms in a dry environment. a desert is a kind of environment. a plant is a kind of organism. an environment means an area. a cactus stem is used for storing water. dry means low in (amount of water ; wetness ; moisture). 
soil erosion means soil loss through (wind ; water ; animals). rain is a kind of water. loss is similar to removal. In the erosion process roots of plants are an inhibitor. grass is a kind of green plant. removing an inhibitor of a process causes that process. 
weathering is a kind of erosion. (rocks ; soil ; materials) interacting with (wind ; moving water) over long periods of time causes weathering. 
soil erosion means soil loss through (wind ; water ; animals). being exposed to (wind ; water ; animals ; heat) can cause erosion (of soil ; of rocks). 
as the population of plants decreases , carbon in the atmosphere will increase. a tree is a kind of plant. a forest contains (plants ; trees). a rain forest is a kind of forest. destroying a forest means cutting down the trees in that forest. if a tree is cut down then that tree will die. if an organism dies then the population of that organism will decrease. a tree is a kind of plant. a plant is a kind of organism. photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. the greenhouse effect is when carbon in the air heats a planet 's atmosphere. destruction means to destroy. 
water is in the gas state , called water vapor , for temperatures between (373 ; 212 ; 100) and 100000000000 (K ; F ; C). (boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. the sun transfers (solar energy ; light energy ; heat energy) from itself to the (planets ; Earth) through sunlight. solar radiation means solar energy. water absorbs solar energy in the water cycle. if (an object ; a substance) absorbs solar energy then (that object ; that substance) will increase in temperature. water is a kind of substance. evaporation is a stage in the water cycle process. a part of a process means a stage in a process. 
a line graph is used for showing (change ; data) over time. 
a frog is an adult form of a frog. metamorphosis is when an animal changes from an immature form to an adult form. amphibians undergo metamorphosis. a frog is a kind of amphibian. an amphibian is a kind of animal. a tadpole is a kind of (young ; baby) frog. young means immature. tadpole changes into a frog. metamorphosis is a kind of process. 
refracting (sunlight ; light) causes (sunlight ; light) to split into different colors. sunlight is a kind of light. refraction is when light bends. the rainbow is made of all different colors. 
camouflage is a kind of adaptation for hiding in an environment. camouflage is a kind of protection (against predators ; from predators ; against consumers). An example of camouflage is when something changes color in order to have the same color as its environment. blending in is synonymous with hiding. surroundings means environment. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
a behavior is a kind of characteristic. inherited characteristics are the opposite of (learned characteristics ; acquired characteristics). animals learn some behaviors from watching their parents. a robin is a kind of bird. a bird is a kind of animal. An example of an inherited behavior is a bird building a nest. 
down feathers are a (thermal ; thermal energy) insulator. sleeping bags usually are made of insulators. materials are used for making products by manufacturers. down feathers are a kind of material. a sleeping bag is a kind of product. insulator means good insulator. 
recycling reduces the resources needed to make something. trees are a source of paper. creating paper requires cutting down trees. trees are a kind of resource. recycling has a positive impact on the environment. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. 
an animal knows how to do instinctive behaviors when it is born. a kangaroo is a kind of animal. animal instinct means instinctive behavior. newborn means just born. An example of an instinct is the kangaroo 's ability to crawl into its mother 's pouch to drink milk. 
(boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. the sun transfers (solar energy ; light energy ; heat energy) from itself to the (planets ; Earth) through sunlight. water absorbs solar energy in the water cycle. water is a kind of liquid. if (an object ; a substance) absorbs solar energy then (that object ; that substance) will increase in temperature. adding heat means increasing temperature. evaporation is a stage in the water cycle process. the sun causes water to evaporate more quickly by adding heat. 
(to slow ; to slow down) decreases speed. rubber is an (electrical ; electrical energy ; thermal ; thermal energy) insulator. a thermal insulator (slows ; prevents) the transfer of heat. a thermal energy conductor transfers heat from (warmer objects ; hotter objects) to cooler objects. metal is a (thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. (pot ; pan ; frying pan) is made of metal for cooking. insulator means good insulator. if too much heat is transferred to an object then that object may burn. burning a living thing usually causes harm to that living thing. a living thing is a kind of object. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. decreasing something negative has a positive impact on a thing. a handle is a part of an object for holding that object. a handle is used for holding an object. if one is holding an object then one is touching that object. a pan is a kind of object. 
potential energy changes to kinetic energy through motion. operating a remote-control toy causes that toy to move. a battery is a source of electrical energy. 
(a hand lens ; a magnifying lens) is synonymous with a magnifying glass. a magnifying glass is a kind of tool for observing small things. magnifying glass is used to see small things by making objects appear bigger. a fingerprint is small in size. (inspect ; observe) means examine. 
(boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. boiling is when liquids are heated above their boiling point. heating means adding heat. becoming is similar to changing. 
rainwater is a kind of water. soil erosion means soil loss through (wind ; water ; animals). a riverbank is made of soil. soil loss causes grooves in soil. 
a white object reflects all visible light. the floor is a kind of object. 
low tide is a stage in the tide cycle process. high tide is a stage in the tide cycle process. the tide cycle regularly occurs twice per day. daily means (every day ; once per day). to happen means to occur. something that happens is a kind of event. 
the moon is less bright than the sun. looking at bright objects has a negative impact on the eyes. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. safe is the opposite of (harm ; danger). 
the senses are used for making observations. a sense is a kind of ability. 
Galileo Galilei made improvements to the telescope to make better observations of celestial bodies. a telescope is a kind of instrument for (observing celestial objects ; observing the sky). a telescope is used for observing (stars ; planets ; moons ; distant objects ; the sky ; celestial objects). to make means to invent. to advance means to improve. instrument means tool. look at means observe. to see means to look. inventing a tool (allows ; enables) that tool to be used. 
gills are a kind of adaptation for getting oxygen underwater. gills are used for breathing water by aquatic animals. breathing is when a gill converts from oxygen in water into oxygen in blood. a fish is a kind of aquatic animal. to be used for is similar to allowing. underwater means below water. an animal requires oxygen for (survival ; to breathe). an aquatic animal is a kind of animal. helping something has a positive impact on that something. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). 
a leaf is a part of a green plant. a leaf performs (photosynthesis ; gas exchange). photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. a leaf absorbs sunlight to perform photosynthesis. 
clouds are formed by water vapor rising and condensing. condensation is when change from a gas into a liquid by reducing heat energy. (cooling ; colder) means (removing ; reducing ; decreasing) (heat ; temperature). condensing means liquid water coming together in the air. 
(a hand lens ; a magnifying lens) is synonymous with a magnifying glass. a magnifying glass is a kind of tool for observing small things. magnifying glass is used to see small things by making objects appear bigger. an insect usually has a small size. an ant is a kind of insect. counting something usually requires seeing that something. an part of an object is smaller than the entire object. legs are usually a part of an animal. an insect is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. a living thing is a kind of object. an insect has six legs. 
photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. carbohydrates are made of sugars. photosynthesis is a kind of process. 
summer has the most sunlight. daylight hours means time during which there is daylight. daylight means sunlight. summer is a kind of season. 
pollen is part of a flower for reproduction. a flower is a part of a plant for (attracting pollinators ; producing seeds). (plant reproduction ; seed production) requires pollination. pollination is when (pollinating animals ; wind ; water) carry pollen from one flower to another flower. to be required means to be necessary. 
copper is a kind of metal. metal is an (electrical ; electrical energy) conductor. wiring requires an electrical conductor. to be used for something means to be required by that something. 
plastic is usually an electrical insulator. an electrical insulator (slows ; prevents) the (transfer of ; flow of) electricity. if electricity (flows through ; is transferred through) the body of an animal then that animal is electrocuted. electrocution causes harm to an organism. an animal is a kind of organism. protecting something means preventing harm to that something. electrical conduction is when (metals ; electrical conductors) conduct electricity through (a wire ; electrical conductor ; metal). an insulator is the opposite of a conductor. insulator means good insulator. a user is a kind of person. person is synonymous with human. a human is a kind of animal. electrical insulation requires wrapping a conductor in an insulator. 
An example of mechanical energy is an object in motion. a wagon is a kind of vehicle. a vehicle is a kind of object. rolling is a kind of motion. a motion is a kind of (event ; action). 
a prism refracts light. a prism is a kind of object. 
a switch is used to (start ; stop) the flow of current in an electrical circuit. 
vibrating matter can produce sound. particles in objects are a kind of matter. tapping two objects together causes the particles in those objects to vibrate. a fork is a kind of object. glass is a kind of object. 
An example of collecting data is measuring. speed is a measure of distance travelled (over time ; divided by time). a stopwatch is a kind of tool for measuring time. a stopwatch is used to measure time. a meter stick is a kind of tool for (measuring length ; measuring distance). a meter stick is used to measure (distance ; height ; length). a calculator is a kind of tool. a calculator is used for (adding ; subtracting ; multiplying ; dividing). a tool is a kind of object. 
the sun (rising ; setting) occurs once per day. once per means every. the sun rising is a kind of event. the sun setting is a kind of event. 
if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. a nail is a kind of object. iron nails are made of iron. iron is a kind of metal. metal is a kind of material. metal is a (thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. a thermal energy conductor transfers heat from (warmer objects ; hotter objects) to cooler objects. to conduct is similar to to transfer. conductivity is a kind of physical property. iron is always magnetic. magnetism is a kind of physical property. iron is a kind of solid. solid is a kind of state of matter. state of matter at room temperature is a kind of physical property. a property of something is a feature of that something. a magnet attracts (magnetic metals ; ferromagnetic metals) through magnetism. 
metal is an (electrical ; electrical energy) conductor. copper is a kind of metal. conductivity is a kind of physical property. a property of something is a feature of that something. 
a mirror reflects light. if an object reflects light toward the eye then that object can be seen. to see means to look. a mirror is a kind of reflective object. 
sound is a kind of energy. a type is synonymous with a kind. vibrating matter can produce sound. a rubber band snapping causes the particles in the rubber band to vibrate. a rubber band is a kind of object. particles in objects are a kind of matter. 
performing lab expiriments accurately requires (reading ; understanding) all directions beforehand. 
An example of conservation is not using fossil fuel. An example of conservation is avoiding waste. 
a balance is a kind of instrument for (measuring mass ; measuring weight). a balance is used for measuring (mass ; weight) (of an object ; of a substance). instrument means tool. determining often requires (measuring ; observing). 
a stopwatch is a kind of tool for measuring time. a stopwatch is used to measure time. determining often requires (measuring ; observing). how long something takes is a kind of measurement of time. 
population is a measure of the number of a species in an environment. eagles eat rabbits. predators eat prey. an eagle is a kind of predator. a rabbit is a kind of prey. as population of prey decreases , the population of predators will decrease. an environment means an area. 
a line graph is used for showing (change ; data) over time. to show means to present. years are a kind of unit for measuring time. yearly means every year. 
one year is equal to 365 days. a complete revolution of the Earth around the sun takes (1 ; one) (year ; solar year ; Earth year). revolving around something means orbiting that something. 
metamorphosis is a stage in the life cycle process of some animals. incomplete metamorphosis is when an insect reaches the adult stage without being a pupa. 
(boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. salt is a kind of solid. the sun transfers (solar energy ; light energy ; heat energy) from itself to the (planets ; Earth) through sunlight. if (an object ; something) is in the sunlight then (that object ; that something) will absorb solar energy. heating salt water causes the water to evaporate while the salt remains. if (an object ; a substance) absorbs solar energy then (that object ; that substance) will increase in temperature. adding heat means increasing temperature. heat means heat energy. 
mixture means solids combined together that maintain their physical properties. 
(boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. state of matter at room temperature is a kind of physical property. water is a kind of liquid. 
heat energy is synonymous with thermal energy. heat means heat energy. heat means the transfer of thermal energy. 
to conduct is similar to to transfer. thermal conduction is when materials conduct heat through those materials. heat means heat energy. (pot ; pan ; frying pan) is made of metal for cooking. a burner is a part of a stove. a burner is made of metal. metal is a (thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. metal is a kind of material. 
if an object reflects a light of a certain color then the object appears to be that color. a leaf is a kind of object. green is a kind of color. a leaf is often green in color. 
a electromagnet is formed by attaching an iron nail wrapped in a copper wire to a circuit. 
(matter ; molecules) vibrating can cause sound. particles in objects are a kind of matter. hitting an object causes the particles in that object to vibrate. a key is a part of a piano. a piano is a kind of musical instrument. a musical instrument is a kind of object. musical instruments make sound when they are played. An example of playing a musical instrument is hitting the keys of a piano. 
An example of camouflage is when something changes color in order to have the same color as its environment. the arctic environment is white in color from being covered in snow. if an animal 's fur is a color then that animal is that color. a hare is a kind of animal. snow falls during the winter in the arctic environment. snow is white in color. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). camouflage is a kind of adaptation for hiding in an environment. 
a cavern is formed by carbonic acid in groundwater seeping through rock and dissolving limestone. a cavern is a kind of land form. 
water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). physical state means state of matter. solid is a kind of state of matter. water is a kind of liquid. freezing means changing from a liquid into a solid by reducing heat energy. 
melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. ice is a kind of solid. water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). water is a kind of liquid. becoming is similar to changing. 
making a valid conclusion in an investigation requires a testable hypothesis. 
if gas is heated then that gas will (expand ; rise). air is a kind of gas. 
a barometer is used to measure air pressure. as air pressure increases , the reading on a barometer will rise. 
a stinger is used for (defense ; stinging) by (a wasp ; a bee). wasp 's stinger contains poison. a stinger is a part of a wasp. 
An example of camouflage is when something changes color in order to have the same color as its environment. camouflage is used for (protection ; hiding) by (prey ; animals) (against predators ; from predators). hiding can be used for avoiding predators. helping something has a positive impact on that something. avoiding predators has a positive impact on (prey 's ; an organism 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). an animal is a kind of organism. 
a meter is a kind of unit for (measuring distance ; measuring length). meters ( m ) are a unit used for measuring (length ; distance) generally used for values between 1 and 1000. 
an animal 's shell is usually hard for protection. a turtle is a kind of animal. a shell is a part of a turtle for protecting the turtle. the function of something is what that something is used to do. (something hard ; something strong) can be used for protection. protecting is a kind of function. 
a snail is a kind of animal. a shell is a part of a snail for protecting the snail. an animal 's shell is usually hard for protection. (something hard ; something strong) can be used for protection. being used for is similar to providing. 
(organisms ; living things) live in (their habitat ; their home). an owl is a kind of predator. an hawk is a kind of predator. living underground can be used for hiding from predators. an animal is a kind of living thing. hiding can be used for avoiding predators. avoiding predators is synonymous with avoiding being eaten. 
if the (environmental temperature ; air temperature) is too cold then (an animal ; a living thing) in that environment may become cold. fur is often part of an animal. keeping warm is the opposite of becoming cold. (thick fur ; thick feathers) can be used for keeping warm. dying is the opposite of (living ; surviving). if a living thing becomes too cold then that living thing will die. an animal is a kind of living thing. the arctic environment is cold in temperature from being at a northern lattitude below 0 degrees celsius during most of the year. a climate is synonymous with an environment. feature is synonymous with characteristic. a structure is a kind of feature. a structure of something is synonymous with a part of that something. 
a tree growing a tree-growth ring occurs once per year. as the amount of available water decreases , tree-growth rings will become narrower. dry means low in (amount of water ; wetness ; moisture). to lower means to decrease. 
lower means less. the Moon has less (water ; air) than Earth. drier means lower in (amount of water ; wetness ; moisture). 
wax is an (electrical ; electrical energy) insulator. melting is when solids are heated above their melting point. melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. an insulator is a kind of material. matter in the liquid state drips. materials are made of matter. 
a producer is a kind of living thing. an organism is a living thing. photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. In the photosynthesis process (carbon dioxide ; water ; sunlight) has the role of raw material. 
a thermal energy conductor transfers heat from (warmer objects ; hotter objects) to cooler objects. when a cooler object touches a warmer object , thermal conduction occurs. heat energy is synonymous with thermal energy. heat means heat energy. thermal conduction is when materials conduct heat through those materials. 
a skunk produces a bad odor. a skunk is a kind of animal. most animals avoid bad odors. a predator is a kind of animal. smell is a property of (an object ; a material ; a substance). an animal is a kind of living thing. a living thing is a kind of object. a property of something is a feature of that something. avoiding is a kind of defense. odor means scent. smell means scent. avoiding predators has a positive impact on (prey 's ; an organism 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). an animal is a kind of organism. helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
(animals ; living things) require water for survival. a desert environment is low in availability of water. conserving water can be used for survival in a dry environment. conserving water is a kind of characteristic. to be required means to be necessary. a desert environment is dry. water is a kind of natural resource. a required resource being low in availability has a negative impact on the something that requires that resource. requiring is similar to needing help. helping something has a positive impact on that something. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. 
cycles of day and night occur once per day. daily means (every day ; once per day). the sun rising and setting causes cycles of day and night. rising is a kind of motion. setting is a kind of motion. the Sun is a kind of star. a star is a kind of (celestial object ; celestial body). a motion is a kind of (event ; action). 
a rubber band is a kind of object. objects are made of (materials ; substances ; matter). vibrating matter can produce sound. make means produce. 
electricity is used as an energy source by electrical devices. electric devices require electrical energy to function. electricity means electrical energy. to power means to provide energy for. to provide something means to be the source of that something. household appliances are a kind of electrical device. a solar panel converts sunlight into electricity. the sun is the source of solar energy called sunlight. if something comes from something else then that something else is a source of that something. 
(an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). spring has warm (temperatures ; weather). an adaptation is an adaptive feature. an animal (being born ; being hatched) when food is available has a positive impact on that animal 's (survival ; health). an animal (being born ; being hatched) when temperatures are warm has a positive impact on that animal 's (survival ; health). spring increases the amount of available food in an environment. a cat is a kind of animal. a jaguar is a kind of big cat. 
a tree frog is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. positively impacting an organism 's survival increases the likelihood of survival of that organism. resemble means look like. if an animal 's skin looks like something then that animal looks like that something. An example of camouflage is when an organism looks like its environment. camouflage is a kind of adaptation for hiding in an environment. an adaptation is a kind of characteristic. more likely means increased likelihood. a leaf is a part of a green plant. a plant is a kind of organism. organisms are a part of an environment. hiding is a kind of protection (against predators ; from predators). protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). 
a block is a kind of object. a paper clip is often made of (magnetic metals ; ferromagnetic metals). if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. a paper clip is a kind of object. magnetism is a property of (materials ; objects) and includes ordered values of (nonmagnetic ; magnetic). a magnet attracts (magnetic metals ; ferromagnetic metals) through magnetism. metal is a kind of material. 
household appliances are a kind of electrical device. electricity is used as an energy source by electrical devices. electric devices require electrical energy to function. where something comes from is a source of that something. the sun is the source of solar energy called sunlight. to power means to provide energy for. to provide something means to be the source of that something. the sun is the source of solar energy called sunlight. a solar panel converts sunlight into electricity. 
a mirror has a shiny surface. shiny (things ; objects) reflect light. a mirror is a kind of reflective object. 
a baby is the offspring of a parent. preferences are generally learned characteristics. a food preference is a kind of preference. inherited characteristics are the opposite of (learned characteristics ; acquired characteristics). inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). trait is synonymous with characteristic. 
the formation of peat occurs at the bottom of swamps. being burried under soil and mud changes peat into coal through extreme heat and pressure in a swamp over a long period of time. being burried under soil and mud changes vegetation into peat through extreme heat and pressure in a swamp over a long period of time. peat is made of decaying vegetation compacted by soil in a swamp over a long period of time. an environment is similar to an ecosystem. a swamp is a kind of environment. ancient means a long time ago. dead organisms decay. vegetation means plants. a plant is a kind of organism. 
piles of rock are a kind of landform. sometimes piles of rock are formed by melting glaciers depositing rocks. to be formed by is to be the result of. 
the Sun is a kind of star. gravity causes orbits. (gravity ; gravitational force) causes (objects that have mass ; substances) (to be pulled down ; to fall) on a planet. planets orbit stars. 
aluminum is recyclable. recyclable means a material can be recycled. aluminum is a kind of metal. metal is a kind of material. if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. recyclability is a property of a material and includes ordered values of (nonrecyclable ; recyclable). 
to be used for something means to help to do that something. An example of a fossil is the bones of an extinct animal. studying fossils is used to learn about organisms from long ago. an animal is a member of an animal species. history occurred a long time ago. a dinosaur is a kind of extinct animal. an animal is a kind of organism. 
(thick fur ; thick feathers) can be used for keeping warm. if the (environmental temperature ; air temperature) is too cold then (an animal ; a living thing) in that environment may become cold. fur is often part of an animal. keeping warm is the opposite of becoming cold. dying is the opposite of (living ; surviving). if a living thing becomes too cold then that living thing will die. an animal is a kind of living thing. feature is synonymous with characteristic. a structure is a kind of feature. a structure of something is synonymous with a part of that something. snowy means a large amount of snow. snow is a kind of ice. ice is cold in temperature. as altitude increases , the temperature of the air will decrease. (cooling ; colder) means (removing ; reducing ; decreasing) (heat ; temperature). a mountain is high in altitude. high is similar to increase. beneficial means helpful. helping something has a positive impact on that something. staying warm has a positive impact on an animal 's (survival ; health). keeping means staying. 
mountains are formed by (earthquakes ; volcanoes ; plate tectonics). the Appalachian Mountains are a kind of mountain. plate tectonics is a kind of process. 
most canyons are formed by flowing rivers through erosion over long periods of time. the Grand Canyon is a kind of canyon. 
aluminum is recyclable. a can is a kind of object. a product is a kind of object. An example of recycling is using an object to make a new object. aluminum is a kind of metal. metal is a kind of material. if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. recyclability is a property of a material and includes ordered values of (nonrecyclable ; recyclable). recyclable means a material can be recycled. 
to be required means to be necessary. forming (coal ; fossil fuels) requires decaying vegetation. 
a complete electrical circuit is a source of electrical energy. a flashlight emits light. a flashlight is a kind of electrical device. electric devices require electrical energy to function. device means tool. a tool is a kind of object. if something is powered by something else then that something requires a source of that something else. 
some animals move quickly to escape predators. escape means avoid. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). (avoiding predators ; escaping predators ; avoiding consumers) is a kind of protection Move to PREDATOR-PREY.. a prairie dog is a kind of animal. running is a kind of movement. to enable is to help. helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
the excretory system removes waste from the body. the excretory system is a kind of body system. removing waste is a kind of function. to have a function is similar to to be responsible for. 
a flashlight converts chemical energy into light energy. a flashlight emits light. light means light energy. a battery is a source of electrical energy. a flashlight requires a source of electricity to produce light. emit means produce. a battery converts chemical energy into electrical energy. 
when a river floods , that river deposits (soil ; sediment) in flood plains. soil and sediment deposited by a river are usually (high ; rich) in nutrients. generally means usually. 
a new season occurs once per three months. once per means every. events occur (at a specific place ; at a specific time ; with a specific frequency). 
wearing safety goggles is a kind of safe practice in a laboratory. safe is the opposite of (harm ; danger). chemical splashing sometimes occurs during experiments. chemical splashing can cause harm (to humans ; to the eyes). a student is a kind of human. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. safety goggles are used for protecting the eyes during experiments. to protect means to make safe. 
a plant absorbs carbon dioxide from the air for photosynthesis. take in means absorb. to emit means to release. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. plants are a source of oxygen through photosynthesis. 
ice is a kind of solid. a metal is usually a solid. aluminum is a kind of metal. a rock is usually a solid. 
(boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. heat means heat energy. if an event occurs by adding something then that event requires that something. a change is a kind of event. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. 
as the number of eggs laid by an animal increases , the number of eggs that hatch will increase. abundant means high in number. high is similar to increase. 
weathering is a kind of erosion. (rocks ; soil ; materials) interacting with (wind ; moving water) over long periods of time causes weathering. flowing is a kind of motion. 
a magnet attracts (magnetic metals ; ferromagnetic metals) through magnetism. iron is always magnetic. a nail is a kind of object. an object is an item. magnetism is a property of (materials ; objects) and includes ordered values of (nonmagnetic ; magnetic). iron is a kind of metal. metal is a kind of material. if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. 
sugar dissolves in water when they are combined. a solution is made of one substance dissolved in another substance. water is a kind of substance. sugar is a kind of substance. 
musical instruments make sound when they are played. vibrating matter can produce sound. air is a kind of matter. a flute is a kind of musical instrument. make means produce. 
brown is a kind of color. snow falls during the winter in the arctic environment. snow is white in color. An example of camouflage is when something changes color in order to have the same color as its environment. white is a kind of color. fur is often part of an animal. a fox is a kind of animal. if an animal 's fur is a color then that animal is that color. blending in is synonymous with hiding. camouflage is used for (protection ; hiding) by (prey ; animals) (against predators ; from predators). camouflage is a kind of adaptation for hiding in an environment. surroundings means environment. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). 
an (animal ; living thing) requires nutrients for survival. (eating ; taking in) food is used to get (nutrients ; energy) by (animals ; living things). finding something means locating that something. eyes are used for seeing by animals by sensing light. dark is the opposite of light. feeling is when an living thing senses through touch. a stout beardfish is a kind of fish. a fish is a kind of aquatic animal. finding something requires sensing that something. an aquatic animal is a kind of animal. helping something has a positive impact on that something. if a living thing requires something then that something has a positive impact on that living thing. whiskers are used for feeling by animals. an animal is a kind of living thing. whiskers are a part of some fish for feeling. a part of something means a characteristic of something. 
a canyon is a kind of landform. most canyons are formed by flowing rivers through erosion over long periods of time. the Grand Canyon was formed by the Colorado River flowing over long periods of time. a landform is a kind of natural formation. erosion is a kind of destructive force. deposition is a kind of constructive force. erosion causes deposition. a kind of something is an example of that something. weathering is a kind of erosion. 
oil is a nonrenewable resource. nonrenewable resources forming occurs over a period of 300000000 years which is considered a very long time to a human. 
photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. a plant absorbs carbon dioxide from the air for photosynthesis. carbon dioxide can be found in the air. absorbing something from the air means removing that something from Earth 's atmosphere. 
safety goggles are used for protecting the eyes during experiments. wearing safety goggles is a kind of safe practice in a laboratory. chemical splashing sometimes occurs during experiments. chemical splashing can cause harm (to humans ; to the eyes). a student is a kind of human. an acid is acidic. acidity is a property of (chemicals ; substances) and includes ordered values of (basic ; neutral ; acidic). a base is basic. to protect means to make safe. to put on means to wear. 
aluminum is a nonrenewable resource. recycling (resources ; nonrenewable resources) has a positive impact on the (environment ; conservation of those resources). aluminum is a kind of metal. metal is a kind of natural resource. helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
a balance is used for measuring (mass ; weight) (of an object ; of a substance). a piece of something is a kind of object. determining often requires (measuring ; observing). to be required means to be necessary. a balance is a kind of instrument for (measuring mass ; measuring weight). an instrument is a piece of equipment. 
eyes can (sense ; detect) light energy for seeing. light is a kind of energy. light means light energy. a student is a kind of human. a human is a kind of animal. a type is synonymous with a kind. microscope is used to see (small things ; microscopic things ; specimens) by making them appear bigger. eyes are usually part of an animal for seeing. 
camouflage is a kind of protection (against predators ; from predators ; against consumers). (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). helping something has a positive impact on that something. camouflage is used for (protection ; hiding) by (prey ; animals) (against predators ; from predators). protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). color is a property of (an object ; a material). a rabbit is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. a living thing is a kind of object. characteristic means property. An example of camouflage is when something (is ; has) the same color as its environment. camouflage is a kind of adaptation for hiding in an environment. 
prehistoric means before 300000000 years ago. (fossil fuels ; fossils) forming occurs over a period of 300000000 years which is considered a very long time to a human. dead organisms decay. oil is a kind of fossil fuel. an animal is a kind of living thing. an organism is a living thing. products (are formed ; are produced ; are created). 
a plant is a kind of living thing. the formation of peat occurs at the bottom of swamps. being burried under soil and mud changes peat into coal through extreme heat and pressure in a swamp over a long period of time. being burried under soil and mud changes vegetation into peat through extreme heat and pressure in a swamp over a long period of time. peat is made of decaying vegetation compacted by soil in a swamp over a long period of time. vegetation means plants. dead organisms decay. products (are formed ; are produced ; are created). an organism is a living thing. 
when water freezes , that water expands. 
melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. heating means adding heat. heat means heat energy. a phase change is when (matter ; a substance) changes from one state into another state. solid is a kind of state of matter. liquid is a kind of state of matter. 
a mirror has a shiny surface. shiny (things ; objects) reflect light. reflection is when a wave bounces off a surface and travels in the opposite direction relative to the angle of incidence. a mirror is a kind of reflective object. 
an anemometer is a kind of instrument for measuring wind speed. an anemometer is used to measure wind speed. instrument means tool. 
the breaking down of food into simple substances occurs in the digestive system. 
a delta is formed by deposition of sediment at the mouth of a river by water fanning out. 
wood is a renewable resource. 
when electricity flows to a light bulb , the light bulb will (turn on ; come on). when a switch in a simple series circuit is closed , electricity will flow through the circuit. 
An example of collecting data is measuring. a thermometer is a kind of instrument for measuring temperature. a thermometer is used to measure temperature. instrument means tool. data means information. temperature is a property of weather. 
(a hand lens ; a magnifying lens) is synonymous with a magnifying glass. a magnifying glass is a kind of tool for observing small things. magnifying glass is used to see small things by making objects appear bigger. counting something usually requires seeing that something. a ladybug is a kind of insect. an insect usually has a small size. 
creating a simple circuit requires a (wire ; battery). a wire is a kind of object. a battery is a kind of object. an object is an item. 
the absorption of oxygen through the blood occurs in the lungs. blood absorbs oxygen in the lungs. 
echo is when sound reflects off of a surface. a surface is a part of an object. a landform is a kind of object. a canyon is a kind of landform. sound waves means sound energy. sound is a kind of sound energy. the ability to reflect off of a surface is a kind of characteristic. hearing is used for sensing sound by animals. a camper is a kind of human. a human is a kind of animal. a shout is a kind of sound. 
the Earth being tilted on its axis causes seasons. winter is a kind of season. summer is a kind of season. December is during the winter in the northern hemisphere. December is during the summer in the southern hemisphere. snow falls during the winter in some environments. summer has hot (temperatures ; weather). people usually only play on the beach when the temperature is hot. 
echo is when sound reflects off of a surface. a wall is a kind of surface. room contains walls. a classroom is a kind of a room. when a sound is produced inside of a room , there is sometimes an echo after the sound. a student is a kind of human. a human is a kind of animal. hearing is used for sensing sound by animals. a shout is a kind of sound. 
a thermometer is a kind of instrument for measuring temperature. a thermometer is used to measure temperature. temperature is a measure of heat energy. heat means heat energy. a stove generates heat for cooking usually. 
a thermal energy conductor transfers heat from (warmer objects ; hotter objects) to cooler objects. metal is a (thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. (pot ; pan ; frying pan) is made of metal for cooking. a spoon is a kind of object. heat energy is synonymous with thermal energy. heat means heat energy. a (pan ; frying pan) is used for cooking food by heating food in it on a stove. a stove generates heat for cooking usually. if (a thermal conductor ; an object) is exposed to a source of heat then (that conductor ; that object) may become (hot ; warm). a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. being (on something ; placed in something ; placed over something) means touching that something. if (one surface ; one substance ; one object) touches something then one is exposed to that something. 
as the smoothness of something increases , the friction of that something will decrease when its surface moves against another surface. a surface is a part of an object. a ball is a kind of object. as moisture of an object decreases , the friction of that object against another object will increase. sticky is similar to moist. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. friction acts to counter the motion of two objects when their surfaces are touching. rolling is a kind of motion. counter means (reduce ; stop ; resist). to reduce means to decrease. faster means (an increase ; higher) in speed. moist means high in moisture. if one surface is (moved against ; moved over ; moved down) another surface then those surfaces are touching. 
predators eat prey. fish eat insects. a fish is a kind of predator. an insect is a kind of prey. as population of predators decreases , the population of prey will increase in an environment. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. a lake is a kind of body of water. a body of water is a kind of environment. if an amount of objects decreases then those objects are fewer in number. 
a barometer is a kind of instrument for measuring air pressure. a barometer is used to measure air pressure. 
oil is a nonrenewable resource. as the use of a resource decreases , the length of time that resource will be available increases. increase is similar to extend. oil is a source of gasoline. vehicles usually require gasoline to operate. a car is a kind of vehicle. as mileage per galon of gasoline increases , the amount of gasoline used will decrease. 
timber companies cut down trees. planting trees is the opposite of cutting down trees. An example of (managing ; maintaining) the number of something is replacing that something. 
(crops ; farming) cause nutrients in the soil to decrease. corn is a kind of crop. as the use of a crop increases , the amount of crops planted will increase. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. ethanol sometimes is made of corn. 
cure means solution to being sick. medicine is used for curing people when they are sick. being sick is a kind of (problem ; harm). a bad reaction to medicine is a kind of problem. medicine can cause people to have bad reactions. 
treating water is used to remove harmful substances before drinking. 
melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. temperature is a measure of heat energy. to add means to increase. water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). an ice cube is a kind of solid. water is a kind of liquid. an increase is a kind of change. 
magnifying makes seeing small things easier through (using a magnifying glass ; using a microscope). hair is thin. thin means small in width. studying something usually requires seeing that something. a hair is a kind of object. an object is an item. 
the sun transfers (solar energy ; light energy ; heat energy) from itself to the (planets ; Earth) through sunlight. if something transfers something else then that something is a source of something else. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. ice is a kind of solid. if something is outside during the day then that something will receive sunlight. absorbing sunlight causes objects to heat. to receive sunlight means to absorb sunlight. heating means adding heat. heat means heat energy. 
a soda can is made of aluminum. aluminum is a kind of metal. metal is a nonrenewable resource. recycling (resources ; nonrenewable resources) has a positive impact on the (environment ; conservation of those resources). 
if a (plant ; crop) requires less water then (that plant ; crop) will survive in a drought. water is a kind of natural resource. using less of a resource means conserving that resource. planting crops is a kind of activity. 
a microscope is a kind of tool for observing small things. microscope is used to see (small things ; microscopic things ; specimens) by making them appear bigger. bacteria is (small ; microscopic) in size. observe means see. bacteria is a part of soil. 
white blood cell destroys pathogens in the body. 
a nonrenewable resource is limited in supply. oil is a nonrenewable resource. oil is a source of gasoline. vehicles usually require gasoline to operate. an automobile is a kind of vehicle. alternative fuel is usually a renewable resource. to be used for something means to be required by that something. an (object ; material ; substance) comes from that object or material 's source. 
trees are a renewable resource. cutting down trees in a forest causes the number of trees to decrease in that forest. to limit means to decrease. 
the circulatory system (absorbs ; carries) (food ; substances ; oxygen) from the digestive and respiratory systems to the rest of the body. 
an animal requires enough nutrients to (maintain good health ; survive). a fish is a kind of animal. an animal needs to eat food for nutrients. remora fish eat food by attaching themselves to sharks and eating the food left behind. 
large (canopies ; trees) block sunlight from reaching the ground. if sunlight is blocked from an area then that area lacks sunlight. lack is similar to (low ; little). to lower means to decrease. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. large leaves are a kind of adaptation for absorbing sunlight. a plant requires sunlight to grow. a plant requires sunlight for photosynthesis. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). a plant is a kind of living thing. helping something has a positive impact on that something. requiring is similar to needing help. 
a plant is a kind of living thing. weeds use up nutrients. nutrients are a kind of resource. weed is a kind of plant. if a living thing is destroyed then the resources used by that living thing will become available. a flower is a part of a plant for (attracting pollinators ; producing seeds). a rose is a kind of flower. a (plant ; living thing) requires nutrients to grow. if a weed is pulled then that weed is destroyed. resources becoming available has a positive impact on the things that need those resources. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. 
condensation is a stage in the water cycle process. a droplet is a small amount of liquid. condensation is when change from a gas into a liquid by reducing heat energy. water is in the gas state , called water vapor , for temperatures between (373 ; 212 ; 100) and 100000000000 (K ; F ; C). (colder ; cooler) means lower in temperature. to lower means to decrease. to reduce means to decrease. temperature is a measure of heat energy. 
an electric car contains an electric motor. an electric car uses less gasoline than a regular car. burning (gasoline ; oil) is a source of pollution. pollution has a negative impact on the (environment ; air quality). organisms are a part of an environment. an animal is a kind of organism. a human is a kind of animal. person is synonymous with human. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. a positive impact is a benefit. using a gasoline engine requires burning gasoline. 
radiation is when heat is transferred through (waves ; particles). fire transfers heat through waves. a campfire is a kind of fire. radiation is a kind of process. 
melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. solid is a kind of state of matter. liquid is a kind of state of matter. gold is a kind of solid. as state of matter changes , mass will not change. stay the same means not changing. 
to turn means to change. water is in the gas state , called water vapor , for temperatures between (373 ; 212 ; 100) and 100000000000 (K ; F ; C). (boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. evaporation causes amount of water to decrease. a burner is made of metal. a burner is a part of a stove. a stove generates heat for cooking usually. (pot ; pan ; frying pan) is made of metal for cooking. metal is a (thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. a thermal energy conductor transfers heat from (warmer objects ; hotter objects) to cooler objects. if (a thermal conductor ; an object) is exposed to a source of heat then (that conductor ; that object) may become (hot ; warm). a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. if (one surface ; one substance ; one object) touches something then one is exposed to that something. being (on something ; placed in something ; placed over something) means touching that something. heat energy is synonymous with thermal energy. transferring is similar to adding. conductivity is a property of a (material ; substance). if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. metal is a kind of material. a burner is a kind of (object ; surface). 
a plant is a kind of living thing. dry means low in (amount of water ; wetness ; moisture). moisture means (liquid ; liquid water). a desert environment is dry. dry environments contain little water. lack is similar to (low ; little). a (plants ; living things) require water for (survival ; to grow). a tree is a kind of plant. an orange tree is a kind of tree. a lack of something that a living thing requires prevents the survival of that living thing. moisture is a kind of environmental factor. 
if fossils of a water animal or plant are found in a place then that place used to be covered by water in the past. an ocean is a kind of body of water. place means area. an environment means an area. a desert is a kind of environment. to discover means to find. 
a telescope is a kind of instrument for (observing celestial objects ; observing the sky). a telescope is used for observing (stars ; planets ; moons ; distant objects ; the sky ; celestial objects). look at means observe. discovering something usually requires seeing that something. to see means to look. 
a planet rotating causes cycles of day and night on that planet. Earth is a kind of planet. daytime means day. nighttime means night. 
fire is a kind of chemical reaction. chemical reactions cause chemical change. fire causes burning. burning is a kind of action. 
In the food chain process a green plant has the role of producer. a producer is a source of energy for consumers. to provide something means to be the source of that something. an organism requires energy for (growth ; repair). organisms are a part of an environment. an environment is similar to an ecosystem. if something requires something else then that something else is important to that something. 
a seed is a kind of food for birds. a chicken is a kind of bird. an animal needs to eat food for nutrients. a bird is a kind of animal. an (animal ; living thing) requires nutrients for survival. nutrients are a source of energy for living things. an animal is a kind of living thing. the sun is the source of energy for life on Earth. where something comes from is a source of that something. if something gains something from something else then that something else is a source of that something. 
removing forests means removing animal habitats. loss is similar to removal. removing a forest means cutting down the trees in that forest. 
plants are a source of oxygen through photosynthesis. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. oxygen has a positive impact on air quality. to improve means to have a positive impact. 
bacteria can cause people to become ill. a positive impact is a benefit. helping something has a positive impact on that something. reducing bacteria in food prevents illness in people. to keep something from happening means to prevent that something. milk is a kind of food. pasteurization reduces the amount of bacteria in milk. Louis Pasteur (created ; invented) pasteurization. pasteurization is a kind of process. 
the sun is the source of energy for life on Earth. organisms mean life. 
an island is formed by lava (being released ; cooling) on the ocean floor over time. an island is a kind of landform. landform means (surface feature ; physical feature ; land feature). 
the Earth revolves around the sun. the Earth revolving around the Sun causes the seasons (to change ; to occur) on its axis. Earth 's tilt on its axis causes seasons (to change ; to occur). to cause something means to contribute to that something happening. 
if something does not have to be replaced for a long time then that something will save money. if something lasts longer then that something will not have to be replaced for a long time. saving money has a positive impact on (a person ; a company). a positive impact is a benefit. replacement means something that is replaced. 
the Earth being tilted on its axis causes (ones side of the Earth ; one hemisphere) to receive less energy from the Sun than the other side. 
a farmer is a kind of human. person is synonymous with human. saving money has a positive impact on (a person ; a company). a positive impact is a benefit. using less resources usually causes money to be saved. water is a kind of natural resource. a farmer farms (crops ; plants) for food. crops are a kind of edible plant for eating. a (plants ; living things) require water for (survival ; to grow). to be used for something means to be required by that something. 
a plant requires sunlight for photosynthesis. sunlight is a kind of light. dark is the opposite of light. photosynthesis is a kind of process. darkness has a negative impact on photosynthesis. to impact means to affect. 
speed is a measure of how fast an object is moving. measuring is used for describing an object. 
a nonrenewable resource is limited in supply. fuel supply is a kind of resource. as the use of a resource decreases , the length of time that resource will be available increases. as the use of renewable resources use of renewable resources increases , use of nonrenewable resources will decrease. resources becoming available has a positive impact on the things that need those resources. if something has a positive impact on something else then that something is important to that something else. 
the circulatory system (absorbs ; carries) (food ; substances ; oxygen) from the digestive and respiratory systems to the rest of the body. the breaking down of food into simple substances occurs in the digestive system. 
the respiratory system takes in oxygen from the air. the respiratory system transfers oxygen to the circulatory system. the circulatory system (absorbs ; carries) (food ; substances ; oxygen) from the digestive and respiratory systems to the rest of the body. take in oxygen means get oxygen into the blood. blood is a part of the circulatory system. 
oxygen is a kind of gas. plants are a source of oxygen through photosynthesis. if something releases something else then that something is the source of that something else. a tree is a kind of plant. 
photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. an apple tree is a kind of plant. the sun is the source of solar energy called sunlight. solar energy is a kind of energy. 
if two substances together form a mixture then those substances can be separated from one another. 
population is a measure of the number of a species in an environment. as available resources increases , the population of an organism that uses those resources will increase. if an organism can compete for resources then more resources will become available to that organism. a starling is a kind of bird. a bird is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. if an animal takes a resource from another animal then that animal competes for resources successfully. a nest is a kind of resource for a bird. 
a graduated cylinder is a kind of instrument for measuring volume of liquids or objects. a graduated cylinder is used to measure volume (of a liquid ; of an object). water is a kind of liquid. instrument means tool. 
soil erosion is a kind of (slow ; natural) process. soil erosion means soil loss through (wind ; water ; animals). soil erosion is when (wind ; moving water ; gravity) move soil from (fields ; environments). sand is similar to soil. loss means reduction. waves are made of moving water. an ocean contains waves. an ocean is a kind of body of water. a body of water meets land at a beach. a beach is a kind of (habitat ; environment). 
summer is when a hemisphere is tilted towards the sun. summer has the most sunlight. the sun is the source of solar energy called sunlight. solar energy is a kind of energy. if something is outside during the day then that something will receive sunlight. gardens are located outside. summer is a kind of season. a plant requires sunlight to grow. 
a plant is a kind of living thing. a living thing is made of cells. a human is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. an apple tree is a kind of plant. Jonny is a name for a human. 
wind is a renewable resource. an energy source is a kind of resource. wind is a source of energy. 
a lab test on a water supply is used for checking water to make sure it is safe to drink by water companies. to protect means to make safe. protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). person is synonymous with human. a human is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
a chainsaw is used for removing trees by humans in less time than an axe. a farmer is a kind of human. removing trees is a kind of task. performing a task (in less time ; more quickly ; faster) has a positive impact on a person 's life. helping something has a positive impact on that something. person is synonymous with human. 
light is a kind of energy. photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. sunlight is a kind of light. a type is synonymous with a kind. a plant requires sunlight for photosynthesis. to be used for something means to be required by that something. to transform means to convert. 
the respiratory system takes in oxygen from the air. the circulatory system brings oxygen from the lungs to the rest of the body. the lungs are a part of the respiratory system. if two things perform the same function then those two things are similar. bringing oxygen to the body is a kind of function. 
a source of something supplies that something. a radio is a kind of electrical device. an electrical device requires electricity to turn on. if something causes a process then that something is required for that process. to cause means to make. turning on is a kind of process. a battery is a source of electrical energy. electricity means electrical energy. 
population is a measure of the number of a species in an environment. fewer means (lower ; less) in number. to lower means to decrease. as population of prey decreases , the population of predators will decrease. an environment means an area. if an organism eats something then that something is a source of frood to that organism. predators eat prey. a coyote is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. if a new predator begins eating prey then the population of that prey will decrease. 
a computer is used for (communication ; finding information). communication has a positive impact on a person 's life. helping something has a positive impact on that something. inventing a tool (allows ; enables) that tool to be used. a computer is a kind of tool. something that is used for communication increases communication. 
a plant cell contains chloroplasts. to be found in means to be contained in. 
the mass of a planet causes the pull of gravity on that planet. Earth is a kind of planet. 
ink is used for hiding from predators by octopuses. (to help ; to benefit) means to be of use. octopuses releasing ink into the water causes predators to have difficulty seeing the octopus. hiding is a kind of protection (against predators ; from predators). hiding means (visibility ; ability to be seen) decreases for camouflage. protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). helping something has a positive impact on that something. difficulty seeing means visibility decreases. 
seaweed is a kind of plant. In the food chain process a green plant has the role of producer. In the food chain process some types of plankton have the role of producer. a plant is a kind of organism. photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. a producer produces its own food. the sun is the source of solar energy called sunlight. if something comes from something else then that something else is a source of that something. a plant requires sunlight for photosynthesis. to be used for something means to be required by that something. 
winter in a hemisphere occurs when the Pole located in that hemisphere is tilted away from the Sun. The North Pole is located in the northern hemisphere. United States is located in the northern hemisphere. Florida is a state located in the United States of America. north is the opposite of south. toward is the opposite of away. 
(arteries ; veins) transport (nutrients ; water ; minerals) throughout the body. . an animal is a kind of living thing. an animal body contains (arteries ; veins). special tissues in plants transport (food ; water ; minerals) throughout the plant. if two things perform the same function then those two things are similar. transporting nutrients, water, and minerals is a kind of function. 
soil erosion means soil loss through (wind ; water ; animals). erosion of soil has a negative impact on the (environment ; soil quality). In the erosion process roots of plants are an inhibitor. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. inhibitor means something that prevents something from happening. protecting something means preventing harm to that something. 
the Earth rotating on its axis causes the sun to appear to move across the sky during the day. setting is a kind of motion. 
an increase is a kind of change. plants are a source of oxygen through photosynthesis. a source of something increases the amount of that something. 
density is a measure of mass (over volume ; divided by volume). determining often requires (measuring ; observing). a balance is a kind of instrument for (measuring mass ; measuring weight). a balance is used for measuring (mass ; weight) (of an object ; of a substance). a graduated cylinder is a kind of instrument for measuring volume of liquids or objects. a graduated cylinder is used to measure volume (of a liquid ; of an object). instrument means tool. density is an intensive property. marble is a kind of (object ; material). 
the muscular system contains muscles. muscles (push ; pull) bones to move the bones. skeletal system is made of bones. the muscular system is a kind of body system. the skeletal system is a kind of body system. 
a plant requires sunlight for photosynthesis. sunlight is a kind of solar energy. solar energy is a kind of energy. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. the sun is the source of solar energy called sunlight. to receive sunlight means to absorb sunlight. a leaf absorbs sunlight to perform photosynthesis. a leaf is a part of a green plant. 
a plant is a kind of living thing. a living thing is made of cells. an animal is a kind of living thing. a fish is a kind of animal. a goldfish is a kind of fish. if two things are made from the same (objects ; material) then those two things are similar. a cell is a kind of object. 
heat is a kind of energy. a car engine is a source of heat. form means kind. if something releases something else then that something is the source of that something else. heat means heat energy. melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. ice is a kind of solid. to add means to increase. a source of something increases the amount of that something. 
migration is a kind of adaptation. a kind of something is an example of that something. migration is an instinctive behavior. an instinctive behavior is a kind of (inherited characteristic ; behavioral adaptation). 
dry means low in (amount of water ; wetness ; moisture). a plant is a kind of living thing. dry environments contain little water. storing water increases the water available to organisms in a dry environment. a (plants ; living things) require water for (survival ; to grow). little is similar to decrease. requiring is similar to needing help. as dryness increases in an environment , the available water in that environment will decrease. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). helping something has a positive impact on that something. storing water is a kind of adaptation. an organism is a living thing. to lower means to decrease. 
solar energy is a renewable resource. a solar panel converts sunlight into electricity. sunlight is a kind of solar energy. solar energy is a kind of energy. an energy source is a kind of resource. converting is similar to producing. electricity sometimes is used for heating (buildings ; substances). a home is a kind of building. 
greatest means (largest ; highest ; most). landfills have a negative impact on the (environment ; communities). humans move waste to a landfill for (disposal ; storage). if a human discards an object then that object will become waste. often humans discard appliances after using those appliances. tool is similar to appliance. a light bulb is a kind of tool for seeing in the dark. a light bulb is used for seeing in the dark. as the time a tool lasts increases , the number of tools discarded will decrease. how long something takes is a kind of measurement of time. decreasing something negative has a positive impact on a thing. less is similar to decrease. a positive impact is a benefit. trash is synonymous with waste. long means great in length. increase means more. 
Earth 's tilt on its axis causes seasons (to change ; to occur). causing is a kind of affecting. 
a producer produces its own food. green plants are a kind of producer. make means produce. a plant is a kind of organism. In the food chain process an animal has the role of consumer which eats (producers ; other animals) for food. an animal is a kind of consumer. a consumer can not produce its own food. 
a meter stick is a kind of tool for (measuring length ; measuring distance). a meter stick is used to measure (distance ; height ; length). (distance moved ; distance travelled) is a measure of how far an object moves. a tectonic plate moves along a fault line. a tectonic plate is a kind of object. 
flammability is a kind of chemical property. 
the pupa stage is a stage in the metamorphosis process of some animals. metamorphosis is a stage in the life cycle process of some animals. a moth undergoes metamorphosis. a moth is a kind of insect. an insect is a kind of animal. the cocoons being created occurs during the the pupa stage in a life cycle. incomplete metamorphosis is when an insect reaches the adult stage without being a pupa. metamorphosis means complete metamorphosis. incomplete is the opposite of complete. opposite is a kind of different. 
ice wedging is when ice causes rocks to crack by expanding in openings. when something breaks , a crack may form in that something. breaking down an object changes that object 's shape and mass. 
nitrogen is a kind of element. the atmosphere is made of 78% nitrogen. most means over 50%. atmosphere means air. 
greatest means (largest ; highest ; most). (boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. the sun transfers (solar energy ; light energy ; heat energy) from itself to the (planets ; Earth) through sunlight. if (an object ; something) is in the sunlight then (that object ; that something) will absorb solar energy. if (an object ; a substance) absorbs solar energy then (that object ; that substance) will increase in temperature. temperature is a measure of heat energy. to add means to increase. increase means more. high is similar to increase. as the surface area of a body of water increases , evaporation of that body of water will increase. a reservoir is a kind of body of water. 
a kettle is formed when chunks of ice left by glaciers melt. 
a delta is formed by deposition of sediment at the mouth of a river by water fanning out. a delta is a kind of geologic (structure ; landform). 
a canyon is a very deep valley. most canyons are formed by flowing rivers through erosion over long periods of time. a valley is formed by a river flowing. 
boiling point means temperature (at which a liquid boils ; above which a liquid boils). the boiling point of water is (212F ; 100C ; 373K). 
higher means (greater ; above) in (value ; amount ; number). the boiling point of water is (212F ; 100C ; 373K). (boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. boiling point means temperature (at which a liquid boils ; above which a liquid boils). boiling point is the highest temperature a liquid can reach. 
as force exerted on an object increases , distance travelled will increase. increase means more. pushing an object requires force. a ball is a kind of object. travel means to move. a roll is a kind of movement. comparing requires measuring. determining often requires (measuring ; observing). 
(to slow ; to slow down) decreases speed. wood is an (electrical ; electrical energy ; thermal energy) insulator. a thermal insulator (slows ; prevents) the transfer of heat. if liquid is boiling then that liquid is hot. water is a kind of liquid. if (a thermal conductor ; an object) is exposed to a source of heat then (that conductor ; that object) may become (hot ; warm). a spoon is a kind of object. if (a spoon ; an object) is used to stir a (liquid ; mixture) then (that spoon ; that object) is touching (that liquid ; that mixture). if (one surface ; one substance ; one object) touches something then one is exposed to that something. to get hot means become hot. less is similar to decrease. wood is a kind of natural material. an insulator is the opposite of a conductor. being (on something ; placed in something ; placed over something) means touching that something. if liquid is boiling then that liquid is hot. a (hot ; warm) something is a source of heat. 
ice is cold in temperature. if a hot (object ; substance) is (exposed to ; touches) a cold (object ; substance) then (that object ; that substance) will likely cool. cooling means temperature decreases. melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. temperature is a measure of heat energy. to add means to increase. an ice cube is a kind of solid. an ice cube is a kind of object. if something is dropped into a container of something else then that something is touching that something else. glass is a kind of open container. water is a kind of substance. 
the cells of multicellular organisms can specialize. a single-cell organism cannot specialize. 
a single-cell organism cannot specialize. if a cell can not specialize then that cell must perform all life functions. single-cell organism means unicellular organism. 
a single-cell organism can survive without the help of other cells. a yeast cell is a kind of single cell organism. 
a grassland environment receives more rainfall than a desert. rainfall is the amount of rain an area receives. receive means get. a grassland is a kind of environment. a desert is a kind of environment. an environment is similar to an ecosystem. an environment means an area. 
lighting a candle causes that candle to burn. fire causes burning. fire is a kind of chemical reaction. chemical reactions cause chemical change. to cause means to result in. 
a plain is made of a flat land surface. flat means level. a property of something is a feature of that something. composed of means made of. composition is a property of (an object ; matter). a plain is a kind of landform. a landform is a kind of object. 
greatest means (largest ; highest ; most). an alligator is a kind of aquatic animal. an (aquatic animal ; aquatic plant) requires great amounts of water to (survive ; thrive). as water increases in an environment , the population of aquatic animals will increase. when a body of water receives more water than it can hold , a flood occurs. increase means more. population increase means more survive. requiring is similar to needing help. a coastal area is a kind of environment. 
the thickness of the parts of an organism is an inherited characteristic. thickness is a measure of how thick an object is. a trunk is a part of a tree for supporting the tree. a tree is a kind of plant. a plant is a kind of organism. an organism is a living thing. a living thing is a kind of object. a pecan tree is a kind of tree. 
balancing a ball on one 's nose is a kind of trick. a trick is a learned behavior. 
earthworms create tunnels in soil. to create means to make. a tunnel is a kind of hole. soil is a part of the ground outside. tunnels in soil loosen that soil. the looseness of soil increases the amount of oxygen in that soil. plants absorb (nutrients ; water ; oxygen) from soil into themselves through their roots. taking in something means (receiving ; absorbing ; getting) something. a tree is a kind of plant. an earthworm is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. to make something easier means to help. getting something increases the amount of that something. 
mountains are formed by (earthquakes ; volcanoes ; plate tectonics). an earthquake is a kind of natural event. a volcanic eruption is a kind of quick process. a process is a kind of event. 
new land can be formed by volcanoes erupting by lava cooling. to make means to form. a volcanic eruption is a kind of change. land is a kind of landform. landform means (surface feature ; physical feature ; land feature). a structure is a kind of feature. 
the moon orbiting the Earth approximately occurs 13 times per year. approximately means about. 
a ball is a kind of object. an tennis ball contains air. something that contains air is usually buoyant. buoyant means able to float in a liquid or gas. water is a kind of liquid. 
friction occurs when two object 's surfaces move against each other. friction is a kind of force. friction causes the temperature of an object to increase. warm up means increase temperature. heat means temperature increases. heating means adding heat. to add means to increase. if something causes an increase in something else then that something produces that something else. a stick is a kind of object. a surface is a part of an object. (to rub ; to rub together) means to move against. 
(gravity ; gravitational force) causes (objects that have mass ; substances) (to be pulled down ; to fall) on a planet. a ball is a kind of object. come down is similar to falling. 
. nutrients are a source of energy for living things. if something is a source of something else then that something usually contains that something else. contain is similar to store. 
a flower is a source of nectar. if (an object ; a substance) makes something then (that object ; that substance) is a source of that thing. a flower is a part of a plant for (attracting pollinators ; producing seeds). nectar is used for attracting pollinators by plants. a plant is a kind of living thing. a living thing is a kind of object. 
skeletal system is made of bones. the skeleton is a part of the skeletal system. 
skin is used for protecting the body from harmful substances. to protect means to defend. a germ is a kind of harmful substance. skin is the (first ; outermost) layer around the body of some animals. 
a pond is (smaller ; shallower) than a lake. 
a leaf is a part of a green plant. a leaf performs (photosynthesis ; gas exchange). to do a job means to perform a job. a leaf absorbs sunlight to perform photosynthesis. In the photosynthesis process (carbon dioxide ; water ; sunlight) has the role of raw material. if something is a raw material in a process then that something is required for that process. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. 
a scar is an acquired characteristic. an organism 's environment affects that organism 's acquired characteristics. a cat is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. if something is made by something else then that something is affected by that something else. trait is synonymous with characteristic. 
sleet is a kind of precipitation. a type is synonymous with a kind. sleet is made of ice. to be made of means to consist of. water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). rain is a kind of water. frozen means solid. 
melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. an ice cube is a kind of solid. water is a kind of liquid. water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). heat means heat energy. adding heat means increasing temperature. if (an object ; a substance) absorbs solar energy then (that object ; that substance) will increase in temperature. if (an object ; something) is in the sunlight then (that object ; that something) will absorb solar energy. the sun is a source of (light ; light energy) called sunlight. to be in the sun means to be in the sunlight. melting is a kind of process. 
if an organism eats something then that something is a source of frood to that organism. a chipmunk is a kind of mammal. a mammal is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. a chipmunk eats acorns. increase means more. as the number of sources of food increase in an environment , the population of the organisms will increase in that environment. a park is a kind of environment. if something causes an increase in something else then that something produces that something else. 
if a tree is located near a sidewalk then the roots of that tree might crack the sidewalk. a tree is a kind of plant. if a plant is (planted ; growing) somewhere then that plant is located there. near is the opposite of (far ; away). cracking something usually has a negative impact on that something. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. best means most positive. 
plants absorb (nutrients ; water ; oxygen) from soil into themselves through their roots. some minerals are sometimes nutrients. roots are a part of a (plant ; tree). 
a plant is a kind of living thing. all living things grow. an animal is a kind of living thing. a cow is a kind of animal. grass is a kind of green plant. the ability to grow is a kind of trait. 
a backbone is a part of a vertebrate animal. 
summer has the most sunlight. summer is a kind of season. 
photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. In the photosynthesis process (carbon dioxide ; water ; sunlight) has the role of raw material. photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. if something is a raw material in a process then that something is required for that process. photosynthesis is a kind of process. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. carbon dioxide is a kind of gas. 
thermal conduction is when materials conduct heat through those materials. to conduct is similar to to transfer. if (a thermal conductor ; an object) is exposed to a source of heat then (that conductor ; that object) may become (hot ; warm). if (one surface ; one substance ; one object) touches something then one is exposed to that something. if (a spoon ; an object) is used to stir a (liquid ; mixture) then (that spoon ; that object) is touching (that liquid ; that mixture). a spoon is a kind of object. a (hot ; warm) something is a source of heat. tea is usually (hot ; warm). 
photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. In the photosynthesis process (carbon dioxide ; water ; sunlight) has the role of raw material. if something is a raw material in a process then that something is required for that process. to be used for something means to be required by that something. carbon dioxide is a kind of gas. 
sugar is a kind of simple carbohydrate. photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. make means produce. a plant requires photosynthesis to (grow ; survive). if something is required for a process then that something positively impacts that process. growing is a kind of process. helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
an anemometer is a kind of instrument for measuring wind speed. an anemometer is used to measure wind speed. instrument means tool. 
specialized tissues at the ends of plant stems are used for growing taller by plants. (to help ; to benefit) means to be of use. 
melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. (boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). water is in the liquid state , called liquid water , for temperatures between (273 ; 32 ; 0) and (373 ; 212 ; 100) (K ; F ; C). water is in the gas state , called water vapor , for temperatures between (373 ; 212 ; 100) and 100000000000 (K ; F ; C). solid is a kind of state of matter. gas is a kind of state of matter. as state of matter changes , mass will not change. stay the same means not changing. 
an earthquake is a kind of natural event. an earthquake changes Earth 's surface quickly. rapidly means quickly. 
photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. green plants are a kind of producer. to turn means to convert. if an organism makes food for itself then that organism does not need to eat other organisms. a plant is a kind of organism. 
natural magnetism is used for pointing north by a compass. a compass is a kind of tool for determining direction by pointing north. an invention is a kind of tool. 
friction acts to counter the motion of two objects when their surfaces are touching. counter means (reduce ; stop ; resist). slipping is a kind of motion. a child is a kind of young human. a human is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. a living thing is a kind of object. ice is a kind of object. a surface is a part of an object. slipping on ice requires walking on that ice. if someone walks on a surface then that someone touches that surface. friction is a kind of force. 
a toaster is a kind of electrical device. electrical devices convert electricity into other forms of energy. to convert means to change. electricity means electrical energy. a toaster converts electrical energy into heat energy for toasting. heat means heat energy. cooking food requires adding heat energy. toasting is a kind of cooking. bread is a kind of food. 
fossil means preserved remains of organisms. skeletal system is made of bones. a skeletal system is a part of an animal. an animal is a kind of organism. a shell is a part of some animals. a tooth is a kind of bone. rock is a kind of nonliving thing. (nonliving ; non-living ; die) is the opposite of (living ; alive ; live). an organism is a living thing. 
the sun is a source of (radiation ; heat) called sunlight. radiation is when heat is transferred through (waves ; particles). heat is a kind of energy. 
pollen is part of a flower for reproduction. pollination is when (pollinating animals ; wind ; water) carry pollen from one flower to another flower. A bee is a pollinating animal. pollination requires (pollinators ; pollinating animals). (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. (plant reproduction ; seed production) requires pollination. 
a caterpillar is the immature form of a butterfly. a butterfly is the (mature form of a ; adult form of a) caterpillar. metamorphosis is when an animal changes from an immature form to an adult form. a butterfly is a kind of insect. an insect is a kind of animal. 
water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). being exposed to (wind ; water ; animals ; heat) can cause erosion (of soil ; of rocks). rain is a kind of water. waves are made of moving water. 
Matter in the liquid phase has variable shape. melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. chocolate is a kind of solid usually. variable means able to change. a bar is a kind of object. shape is a property of an object. 
(glass ; objects made of glass) cause refraction of light. a window is a kind of object. 
when the temperature in a building is cooler than the temperature selected on the thermostat , the furnace will turn on automatically. a home is a kind of building. a house is a kind of home. 
hiding is a kind of protection (against predators ; from predators). protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). helping something has a positive impact on that something. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). a predator is a kind of enemy to its prey. a hare is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. a hare is a kind of prey. disguise means change appearance to hide. to turn means to change. Camouflage is synonymous with visual disguise. An example of camouflage is when something changes color in order to have the same color as its environment. brown is a kind of color. white is a kind of color. if an animal 's fur is a color then that animal is that color. snow falls during the winter in the arctic environment. snow is white in color. 
looking like is similar to camouflaging as. camouflage is a kind of adaptation for hiding in an environment. helping something has a positive impact on that something. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). camouflage is a kind of protection (against predators ; from predators ; against consumers). consumers eat other organisms. a plant is a kind of organism. In the food chain process an animal has the role of consumer which eats (producers ; other animals) for food. (avoiding predators ; escaping predators ; avoiding consumers) is a kind of protection Move to PREDATOR-PREY.. an adaptation is a kind of characteristic. An example of camouflage is when an organism looks like its environment. a plant is a kind of organism. rock means stone. a pebble is a kind of small rock. an ecosystem contains nonliving things. rock is a kind of nonliving thing. 
coal is a kind of fossil fuel. (fossil fuels ; fossils) are formed by dead organisms over time. a plant is a kind of organism. forming (coal ; fossil fuels) requires decaying vegetation. vegetation means plants. dead organisms decay. 
a nail is a kind of object. iron nails are made of iron. if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. iron is a kind of element. an element is a kind of material. iron is a kind of metal. metal is an (electrical ; electrical energy) conductor. metal is a (thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. heat means heat energy. heat energy is synonymous with thermal energy. conductivity is a property of a (material ; substance). iron is always magnetic. a magnet attracts (magnetic metals ; ferromagnetic metals) through magnetism. magnetism is a property of (materials ; objects) and includes ordered values of (nonmagnetic ; magnetic). 
the internet is used for communicating faster. to be used for is similar to allowing. faster means (an increase ; higher) in speed. an increase is a kind of change. 
evaporation is a stage in the water cycle process. evaporation is a kind of process. evaporation is when water is drawn back up into the air in the water cycle. 
a sifter is a kind of tool for separating mixtures. a sifter is used for separating mixtures. An example of a mixture is (sand ; clay ; soil) mixed together. 
sound is a kind of air vibration. hearing is used for sensing sound by animals. a student is a kind of human. a human is a kind of animal. talking is when a human produces sound to communicate. sound can travel through air. if two objects are apart from each other then matter is between those two objects. air is a kind of matter. an animal is a kind of living thing. a living thing is a kind of object. air is a vehicle for sound. a vehicle for something (allows ; enables) that something to occur. 
the moon orbits the Earth. revolving around something means orbiting that something. Earth is a kind of planet. the Earth revolves around the sun. the Sun is a kind of star. 
boiling point means temperature (at which a liquid boils ; above which a liquid boils). water is a kind of liquid. (boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. becoming is similar to changing. 
An example of camouflage is when something (is ; has) the same color as its environment. green is a kind of color. a leaf is a part of a tree. a tree is a kind of plant. a plant is a kind of organism. organisms are a part of an environment. 
a thermometer is a kind of instrument for measuring temperature. instrument means tool. a thermometer is used to measure temperature. melting point means temperature (at which a solid melts ; above which a solid melts). ice is a kind of solid. 
seed dispersal is when the seeds of a plant (are moved ; are carried ; are spread ; are dropped ; ) from the parent plant to another area. a bush is a kind of plant. (birds ; some animals) are a vehicle for spreading the seeds of a plant. a bear is a kind of animal. seed dispersal has a positive impact on (a plant ; a plant 's reproduction). a positive impact is a benefit. An example of seed dispersal is animals (eating ; excreting) seeds. a berry contains seeds. 
waxy leaves are used for storing water by some plants. keeping is similar to storing. storing water is a kind of adaptation. an adaptation is a kind of characteristic. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). helping something has a positive impact on that something. storing water increases the water available to organisms in a dry environment. a climate is synonymous with an environment. a plant is a kind of organism. an organism is a living thing. (animals ; living things) require water for survival. 
coal is a kind of fossil fuel. oil is a kind of fossil fuel. oil is a source of gasoline. (fossil fuels ; fossils) are formed by dead organisms over time. forming (coal ; fossil fuels) requires decaying vegetation. (fossil fuels ; fossils) forming occurs over a period of 300000000 years which is considered a very long time to a human. prehistoric means before 300000000 years ago. vegetation means plants. a plant is a kind of organism. dead organisms decay. requiring is similar to needing help. 
hypothesis means scientific guess about the cause and effect of an event. 
the moon does not contain (air ; water). if something does not contain something else then that something lacks that something else. (rocks ; soil ; materials) interacting with (wind ; moving water) over long periods of time causes weathering. wind means moving air. soil erosion means soil loss through (wind ; water ; animals). lack is similar to (low ; little). 
the amount of daylight is greatest in the summer. the amount of daylight is least in the winter. amount is a property of something and includes ordered values of (none ; least ; little ; some ; half ; much ; many ; most ; all). increase means more. an increase is a kind of change. 
a ruler is a kind of tool for measuring length. a ruler is used for measuring the length of an object. a balance is a kind of instrument for (measuring mass ; measuring weight). a balance is used for measuring (mass ; weight) (of an object ; of a substance). a seashell is a kind of object. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. to be used for something means to be required by that something. instrument means tool. 
an electromagnet is a kind of electric magnet. a electromagnet is formed by attaching an iron nail wrapped in a copper wire to a circuit. iron is a kind of metal. creating a simple circuit requires a (wire ; battery). if battery in an electromagnet is active then the nail in the electromagnet will become magnetic. 
a polar bear requires a cold environment. a pool is a kind of body of water. a body of water is a kind of environment. zoo exhibits should contain all things required by the animals living in those exhibits. a bear is a kind of animal. including means containing. some animals live in zoo exhibits. (temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). a region is similar to an environment. 
a telescope is a kind of instrument for (observing celestial objects ; observing the sky). a telescope is used for observing (stars ; planets ; moons ; distant objects ; the sky ; celestial objects). useful means good to use. a moon is a kind of celestial (object ; body). a surface is a part of an object. to observe means to gather information. answering questions requires information. to be used for something means to be required by that something. 
a camera is used for recording images. a camera is a kind of tool for recording images. image means visual depiction of an object. a tree is a kind of plant. a plant is a kind of organism. an organism is a living thing. a living thing is a kind of object. determining the type of an organism requires having information about that organism. an image transmits visual information. 
the kidney (removes ; filters) (cell waste ; byproducts) from the blood. removing waste is a kind of function. 
an ice cube is a kind of solid. solid is a kind of state of matter. physical state means state of matter. 
photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. In the photosynthesis process (carbon dioxide ; water ; sunlight) has the role of raw material. if something is a raw material in a process then that something is required for that process. a plant absorbs carbon dioxide from the air for photosynthesis. take in means absorb. photosynthesis is a kind of process. if something is required in a process then obtaining that something is a step in that process. absorbing is similar to obtaining. 
a laser is a kind of device for producing light. a laser is used for producing light. light means light energy. 
a line graph is used for showing (change ; data) over time. to show means to display. hours are a kind of unit for measuring time. a line graph is a kind of graph. a type is synonymous with a kind. temperature is a measure of heat energy. a measurement is a kind of data. 
limestone is a kind of sedimentary rock. nearly all fossils are found in sedimentary rock. fossils are formed when layers of sediment cover the remains of organisms over time. sedimentary rocks are formed from sediment (compacting ; cementing) together. history occurred a long time ago. a type is synonymous with a kind. something from long ago can be used for studying history. useful means good to use. 
the formation of rock is a kind of process. diamond is a kind of mineral. rock is made of minerals. the formation of diamonds occurs beneath the surface of the Earth by carbon being heated and pressured. 
a nail is a kind of object. iron nails are made of iron. if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. iron is always magnetic. magnetism is a property of (materials ; objects) and includes ordered values of (nonmagnetic ; magnetic). 
a tag is a kind of tool for monitoring an object 's location. a tag is used for monitoring an object 's location. an animal is a kind of living thing. a living thing is a kind of object. to roam means to move to various locations. studying moving habits requires knowing location. monitoring something is used for knowing information about that something. 
as the size of a leaf increases , the amount of sunlight absorbed by that leaf will increase. width is a property of (size ; shape) and includes ordered values of (narrow ; wide). as flatness of a leaf increases , the amount of sunlight that leaf can absorb will increase. flatness is a property of (a surface ; the shape of an object) and includes ordered values of (uneven ; flat). a leaf is a kind of object. a surface is a part of an object. a leaf absorbs sunlight to perform photosynthesis. a leaf is a part of a green plant. a plant requires photosynthesis to (grow ; survive). rainy means often raining. as the amount of rain increases in an environment , available sunlight will decrease in that environment. a climate is synonymous with an environment. the decrease of something required by an organism has a negative impact on that organism 's survival. a plant is a kind of organism. large leaves are a kind of adaptation for absorbing sunlight. larger means (greater ; higher ; more) in size. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. 
gravity causes orbits. planets orbit stars. the Sun is a kind of star. to be required means to be necessary. if something causes a process then that something is required for that process. gravity is a kind of force. 
(glass ; objects made of glass) cause refraction of light. an eyeglass lens is often made of glass. an eyeglass lens is a kind of object. 
(hunting ; scavenging) is a kind of skill. skills are learned characteristics. hunting is a kind of action. 
soil is formed by rocks eroding. a plant requires soil for (survival ; to grow). a tree is a kind of plant. 
a plant is a kind of living thing. a compost pile is used for recycling plants. recycling (resources ; nonrenewable resources) has a positive impact on the (environment ; conservation of those resources). plants are a kind of resource. a living thing is a kind of object. 
the surface of the Earth contains mountains. the surface of the Moon contains mountains. a mountain is a kind of landform. landform means (surface feature ; physical feature ; land feature). to be found in means to be contained in. 
a fish is a kind of aquatic animal. aquatic (animals ; plants) live in bodies of water. a pond is a kind of body of water. polluting means (something harmful ; something poisonous) is added to an environment causing harm to the environment. toxic means poisonous. dumping something in an environment means adding that something to that environment. pollution has a negative impact on the (environment ; air quality). harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. an animal is a kind of organism. organisms are a part of an environment. to cause means to result in. harming an organism can cause that organism to die. 
shortest means (least ; smallest) in length. as time spent taking a shower decreases , water used will decrease. using less of a resource means conserving that resource. water is a kind of natural resource. to shorten means to make shorter. 
light is a kind of energy. sugar is a kind of simple carbohydrate. photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. make means produce. chlorophyll is used for absorbing light energy by plants. light means light energy. In the photosynthesis process (carbon dioxide ; water ; sunlight) has the role of raw material. if something is a raw material in a process then that something is required for that process. to be used for something means to be required by that something. sunlight is a kind of light. using a raw material sometimes requires absorbing that raw material. 
In the erosion process roots of plants are an inhibitor. roots are a part of a (plant ; tree). a tree is a kind of plant. clearing a forest means humans cutting down the trees. removing a forest means cutting down the trees in that forest. removing an inhibitor of a process causes that process. soil erosion is a kind of (slow ; natural) process. 
sea means ocean. an ocean is a kind of body of water. aquatic (animals ; plants) live in bodies of water. a fish is a kind of aquatic animal. a shark is a kind of fish. if fossils of a water animal or plant are found in a place then that place used to be covered by water in the past. if fossils of a water animal or plant are found in a place then that animal or plant used to live in that place. place means area. to discover means to find. history means the past. 
the gravitational pull of the Moon on Earth 's oceans causes the tides. to cause means to have an effect. tidal range is a measure of the vertical distance from high tide to low tide. 
gravity causes orbits. the moon orbits the Earth. 
if fossils of a water animal or plant are found in a place then that place used to be covered by water in the past. a trilobite is a kind of water animal. Ohio is a state located in the United States of America. a state is a kind of place. 
a leaf performs (photosynthesis ; gas exchange). a leaf is a part of a green plant. a tree is a kind of plant. 
(to slow ; to slow down) decreases speed. grass is a rough surface. concrete is usually a smooth surface. as roughness of a surface increases , friction will increase. friction acts to counter the motion of two objects when their surfaces are touching. the sidewalk is a kind of object. a ball is a kind of object. a surface is a part of an object. an object being pushed across another object causes their surfaces to move against each other. if one surface is (moved against ; moved over ; moved down) another surface then those surfaces are touching. a kick is a kind of push. counter means (reduce ; stop ; resist). to reduce means to decrease. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. faster means (an increase ; higher) in speed. speed is a measure of how fast an object is moving. increase means more. travel means to move. 
taking samples of water is used for studying the quality of water. 
(an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). a bird is a kind of animal. 
the first quarter phase of the moon occurs after the new moon. a different moon phase occurs once per week. a first quarter is a kind of phase of the moon. a new moon is a kind of phase of the moon. (type of moon ; kind of moon) means moon phase. 
non-contact forces can affect objects that are not touching. a magnet attracts (magnetic metals ; ferromagnetic metals) through magnetism. magnetism does not require contact between objects to act. a paper clip is a kind of object. a magnet is a kind of object. magnetism is a kind of force. a kind of something is an example of that something. 
fire causes burning. fire is a kind of chemical reaction. chemical reactions cause chemical change. 
an (aquatic animal ; aquatic plant) requires great amounts of water to (survive ; thrive). a fish is a kind of aquatic animal. aquatic (animals ; plants) live in bodies of water. a pond is a kind of body of water. drought means available water decreases in an environment. the decrease of something required by an organism has a negative impact on that organism 's survival. habitat is similar to environment. an animal is a kind of organism. if something has a negative impact on the survival of an organism then that organism may be unable to survive. 
oxygen is a kind of gas. plants are a source of oxygen through photosynthesis. green plants are a kind of producer. if something releases something else then that something is the source of that something else. an animal requires oxygen for (survival ; to breathe). In the food chain process an animal has the role of consumer which eats (producers ; other animals) for food. breathing is when a lung converts from oxygen in air into oxygen in blood. the lungs are a part of the body of an animal used for breathing air. to breathe in means to absorb air. take in means absorb. 
to be used for something means to help to do that something. webbed feet are used for moving faster through water by aquatic animals. aquatic (animals ; plants) live in bodies of water. a frog is a kind of aquatic animal. helping something has a positive impact on that something. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). a part of something means a characteristic of something. a foot is a part of some animals for walking. An example of an adaptation is moving fast. 
a thermometer is a kind of instrument for measuring temperature. a thermometer is used to measure temperature. instrument means tool. 
consumers eat other organisms. a frog is a kind of animal. a turtle is a kind of animal. a fish is a kind of animal. a mouse is a kind of animal. a bird is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. alligators eat (frogs ; turtles ; fish ; mice ; birds). In the food chain process an animal has the role of consumer which eats (producers ; other animals) for food. a role in the ecosystem is a role in the food chain process. 
as ability to transport food increases around the world , the available types of food in distant locations will increase. as ability to preserve food increases , the ability to transport food increases. to preserve food means to keep fresh food from spoiling. having a variety of foods available has a positive impact on people 's lives. variety means (different kinds ; different types). helping something has a positive impact on that something. Hawaii is located far from the United States mainland. far means great in distance. distant means great in distance. the United States of America is a kind of location. 
the mass of a planet causes the pull of gravity on that planet. Earth is a kind of planet. the ground is at the bottom of an area. the bottom is the lowest part of something. low means down. (gravity ; gravitational force) causes (objects that have mass ; substances) (to be pulled down ; to fall) on a planet. a ball is a kind of object. creating is similar to causing. 
weathering means breaking down (rocks ; surface materials) from larger whole into smaller pieces by weather. cracking something may cause that something to break apart. An example of weathering is when a plant root grows into a crack in rock. a tree is a kind of plant. weathering is a kind of process. a process is a kind of event. 
pollution is when humans pollute the environment with pollutants. chemicals can be pollutants. burning (gasoline ; oil) is a source of pollution. fewer means (lower ; less) in number. to lower means to decrease. to reduce means to decrease. pollution has a negative impact on the (environment ; air quality). decreasing something negative has a positive impact on a thing. helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
a plant is made of plant cells. a plant cell is box-like in shape. structure is similar to shape. shape is a kind of characteristic. 
as heat is transferred from something to something else , the temperature of that something will decrease. freezing means changing from a liquid into a solid by reducing heat energy. to reduce means to decrease. becoming is similar to changing. temperature is a measure of heat energy. 
pine needle is similar to a leaf. a leaf performs (photosynthesis ; gas exchange). photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. sugar is a kind of simple carbohydrate. sugars are transported from the leaves to the roots of a plant. a tree is a kind of plant. 
as air pressure surrounding a flexible container decreases , that flexible container will expand. a balloon is highly flexible. a balloon contains gas. a container contains (objects ; material ; substances). expand means increase in size. width is a property of (size ; shape) and includes ordered values of (narrow ; wide). as altitude increases , air pressure will decrease. a decrease is a kind of change. 
a cactus spine is a part of a cactus for protecting the cactus from animals. a structure of something is synonymous with a part of that something. protecting something means preventing harm to that something. eating (an animal ; a plant) means killing (that animal ; that plant). a cactus is a kind of plant. killing means harming something causing death. a sharp object can be used for protection. a spine is a kind of object. 
(boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. (warm ; becoming warm) means heat is added. heat means heat energy. heat is a kind of energy. the sun transfers (solar energy ; light energy ; heat energy) from itself to the (planets ; Earth) through sunlight. 
melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. an ice cube is a kind of solid. a puddle is a kind of body of water. water is a kind of liquid. transferring is similar to adding. thermal conduction is when materials conduct heat through those materials. to conduct is similar to to transfer. if something is outside during the day then that something will receive sunlight. to receive sunlight means to absorb sunlight. absorbing sunlight causes objects to heat. heating means adding heat. an ice cube is a kind of object. the sidewalk is a kind of object. a sidewalk is located outside. sidewalk means pavement. transfer is a kind of process. objects are made of (materials ; substances ; matter). 
the circulatory system (absorbs ; carries) (food ; substances ; oxygen) from the digestive and respiratory systems to the rest of the body. the digestive system breaks food into nutrients for the body. . bone cells are a part of the body. 
as the amount of food an animal eats decreases , that organism will become thinner. a deer is a kind of animal. a deer is a kind of herbivore. if an organism dies then the population of that organism will decrease. killing means harming something causing death. a plant is a kind of organism. herbivores only eat plants. if an organism eats something then that something is a source of frood to that organism. 
to be used for something means to help to do that something. a computer is used for (communication ; finding information). useful means good to use. 
a stopwatch is used to measure time. 
An example of a fossil is a footprint in a rock. 
pollution has a negative impact on the (environment ; air quality). harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. habitat is similar to environment. water is a part of an environment. 
to be used for something means to help to do that something. a refrigerator is used for keeping food fresh for a long period of time. keeping food cold is used for keeping food fresh. 
aquatic (animals ; plants) live in bodies of water. a pond is a kind of body of water. an (aquatic animal ; aquatic plant) requires great amounts of water to (survive ; thrive). the decrease of something required by an organism has a negative impact on that organism 's survival. a plant is a kind of organism. drought means available water decreases in an environment. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. a population is made of one type of organism in an area. an environment means an area. a body of water is a kind of environment. 
cutting down trees has a negative impact on an (ecosystem ; organisms living in an ecosystem). an environment is similar to an ecosystem. habitat is similar to environment. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. a squirrel is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. (organisms ; living things) live in (their habitat ; their home). building usually requires cutting down trees. humans changing (ecosystems ; environments) usually has a negative impact on an (ecosystem ; organisms living in an ecosystem). 
as the sale of meat grown on farms increases , the sale of meat grown in the wild will decrease. fish is a kind of meat. increase means more. as the sale of a product decreases , the amount of money made by the person selling that product will decrease. money usually has a positive impact on a person 's life. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. 
a pulley is a kind of simple machine. a pulley is used for (lifting ; lowering) objects. a load of bricks is a kind of object. 
binoculars are a kind of instrument for observing distant objects. binoculars are used for observing distant objects. instrument means tool. a tool is a kind of object. look at means observe. to watch means to look at. animals usually distance themselves from humans. a bird is a kind of animal. a scientist is a kind of human. far means great in distance. 
round objects roll. a ball is a kind of object. 
feathers are a part of a bird. a bird is a kind of animal. to classify means to decide what class something belongs to. classifying is when one sorts something by (kind ; type). 
ink is used for hiding from predators by octopuses. hiding is a kind of protection (against predators ; from predators). (avoiding predators ; escaping predators ; avoiding consumers) is a kind of protection Move to PREDATOR-PREY.. a predator is a kind of enemy to its prey. octopuses releasing ink into the water causes predators to have difficulty seeing the octopus. hiding means (visibility ; ability to be seen) decreases for camouflage. difficulty seeing means visibility decreases. protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). helping something has a positive impact on that something. an octopus is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. an enemy is a threat. an threat threatens. 
An example of camouflage is when something changes color in order to have the same color as its environment. to match means to be the same. camouflage can be used for hunting for (prey ; food). an (animal ; living thing) requires nutrients for survival. surroundings means environment. . an animal is a kind of living thing. a lizard is a kind of animal. a chameleon is a kind of lizard. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
green is a kind of color. grass is green in color. An example of camouflage is when something (is ; has) the same color as its environment. camouflage is used for (protection ; hiding) by (prey ; animals) (against predators ; from predators). hiding is a kind of protection (against predators ; from predators). protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). helping something has a positive impact on that something. habitat is similar to environment. (organisms ; living things) live in (their habitat ; their home). grass snakes live in grass. a snake is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. 
a rock is a kind of object. spotted is a kind of color pattern. coloration means a pattern of colors. coloration means a thing 's color. color is a property of (an object ; a material). bright means (bright ; light) in color. 
a seismometer is used to measure the strength or magnitude of an earthquake. 
when a river floods , that river deposits (soil ; sediment) in flood plains. floodplains are flat in shape. a floodplain is a kind of (land ; landform). the properties of something are used for describing that something. flatness is a property of (a surface ; the shape of an object) and includes ordered values of (uneven ; flat). a landform is a kind of object. 
an earthquake changes Earth 's surface quickly. an earthquake causes the ground to shake. rapidly means quickly. the ground means Earth 's surface. shaking is similar to shifting. to cause means to result in. 
the Sun is a kind of star. a star is made of gases. Earth is made of rock. 
a landslide is when (water ; gravity) rapidly moves rocks or soil downhill especially after a rain storm. flowing is a kind of motion. natural events usually cause changes to Earth 's surface. a landslide is a kind of natural event. rain is a kind of water. 
a mountain is taller than a hill. a hill is more rounded than a mountain. larger means (greater ; higher ; more) in size. taller means greater in (height ; size). larger means (greater ; higher ; more) in size. (larger ; bigger) is the opposite of smaller. 
rust forming is a kind of chemical change. chemical reactions cause (new substances ; different substances) to form. chemical reactions cause chemical change. rusting means forming rust. 
an animal requires energy to move. person is synonymous with human. a human is a kind of animal. jogging is similar to running. moving changes stored energy into motion and heat. running is a kind of movement. 
the shape of body parts is an inherited characteristic. arms are a part of a person 's body for manipulating objects. inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). long means great in length. length is a property of the shape of an object. 
An example of hunting is an otter cracking open clams with a rock. skills are learned characteristics. (hunting ; scavenging) is a kind of skill. a behavior is a kind of characteristic. 
drought means available water decreases in an environment. natural disasters can cause animals to leave an environment. an environment means an area. water is a kind of natural resource. food is a kind of resource. as available water in an environment decreases , the amount of available food in that environment will decrease. a drought is a kind of natural disaster. if the amount of available food and water decreases in an environment then animals may leave that environment to find food and water. 
mice live in in holes in the ground (in fields ; in forests). a forest contains (plants ; trees). prey is a kind of food for predators. predators eat prey. most predators (live in ; live near) the same environment as their prey. some crickets live in forests. a forest is a kind of environment. 
to give off means to be the source of. rocks are a source of shelter for small animals in an environment. an environment is similar to an ecosystem. a body of water is a kind of environment. a pond is a kind of body of water. a fish is a kind of aquatic animal. an aquatic animal is a kind of animal. a rock is a kind of object. objects in an environment are a part of that environment. 
water is in the liquid state , called liquid water , for temperatures between (273 ; 32 ; 0) and (373 ; 212 ; 100) (K ; F ; C). water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. if something is outside during the day then that something will receive sunlight. warm means medium (heat energy ; temperature). to receive sunlight means to absorb sunlight. if (an object ; a substance) absorbs solar energy then (that object ; that substance) will increase in temperature. temperature is a measure of heat energy. a sidewalk is located outside. sunlight means solar energy. an ice cube is a kind of object. to add means to increase. 
(boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. water is in the gas state , called water vapor , for temperatures between (373 ; 212 ; 100) and 100000000000 (K ; F ; C). water is a kind of liquid. the sun is a source of (light ; light energy) called sunlight. the sun is a source of (radiation ; heat) called sunlight. heat means heat energy. the sun transfers (solar energy ; light energy ; heat energy) from itself to the (planets ; Earth) through sunlight. if something releases something else then that something is the source of that something else. 
the shape of body parts is an inherited characteristic. long means great in length. length is a property of the shape of an object. inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). a mane is a part of a horse. 
a face dimple is (depressed ; indented) in shape. the shape of body parts is an inherited characteristic. trait is synonymous with characteristic. a face is often a part of an animal. indented means a little deep in depth. depth is a property of the shape of an object. 
a fish is a kind of aquatic animal. aquatic (animals ; plants) live in bodies of water. a predator eats other animals for food. an osprey is a kind of bird. an aquatic animal is a kind of animal. a marsh is a kind of body of water. a body of water is a kind of environment. predators eat prey. most predators (live in ; live near) the same environment as their prey. prey is a kind of food for predators. 
if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. wood is a kind of natural material. wood is a strong material. wood is a light material. light means low in weight. a chair is a kind of object. (mass ; weight) is a property of (matter ; objects ; materials). strong means high in strength. strength is a property of (an object ; a material). 
if a magnet is attracted to a metal then that magnet will stick to that metal. magnetism is a property of (materials ; objects) and includes ordered values of (nonmagnetic ; magnetic). steel is a kind of metal. metal is a kind of material. (steel ; carbon steel) is always (ferromagnetic ; magnetic). if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. a magnet attracts (magnetic metals ; ferromagnetic metals) through magnetism. a board is a kind of object. 
magma is found below the ground. lava is found above the ground. below is the opposite of above. opposite is a kind of different. 
Earth 's plates means tectonic plates. tectonic plates being pushed together causes earthquakes. an earthquake causes the ground to shake. shaking is a kind of motion. 
a squirrel is a kind of animal. squirrels eat (edible plants ; fruit). an animal requires enough nutrients to (maintain good health ; survive). . (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. take away means decreasing. destroying something decreases the amount of that something. fire destroys plants in an environment. a tree is a kind of plant. a tree is a source of (shelter ; food) for (birds ; animals) in an ecosystem. a forest contains (plants ; trees). a forest is a kind of environment. an animal needs to eat food for nutrients. shelter is used for protection by animals against weather. protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). an animal is a kind of living thing. helping something has a positive impact on that something. requiring is similar to needing help. 
advantage has a positive impact on something. can be means able to be. the ability (to access ; to acquire ; to find) resources has a positive impact on an organism 's (survival ; health). plants absorb (nutrients ; water ; oxygen) from soil into themselves through their roots. taking in something means (receiving ; absorbing ; getting) something. taking in something means acquiring that something. something in the soil is located underground. an animal can not use underground water. drought means available water decreases in an environment. an animal is a kind of organism. water is a kind of natural resource. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. the decrease of something required by an organism has a negative impact on that organism 's survival. (animals ; living things) require water for survival. 
inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). if something is copied then that something will be (the same ; similar ; identical). limbs are part of an animal. an arm is a kind of limb. the number of body parts of an organism is an inherited characteristic. an animal is a kind of organism. (children ; young) is synonymous with offspring. 
a raccoon is a kind of animal. scavenging is synonymous with looking for food. (hunting ; scavenging) is a kind of skill. skills are learned characteristics. a behavior is a kind of characteristic. a trashcan contains (trash ; garbage ; waste). raccoons eat (trash ; garbage ; waste). a container contains (objects ; material ; substances). looking in a container sometimes requires opening that container. 
a drought occurs over a period of (months ; years). a drought is a kind of slow environmental change. 
the moon orbits the Earth. a revolution is when something revolves around something else. revolving is a kind of motion. travel means to move. revolving around something means orbiting that something. an orbit is a kind of regular path. 
friction occurs when two object 's surfaces move against each other. (to rub ; to rub together) means to move against. friction causes the temperature of an object to increase. temperature rise means become warmer. temperature rise means temperature increase. temperature is a measure of heat energy. become warm means get warm. an increase is a kind of change. 
a hand is a kind of object. a hand is a part of the body. a mammal is warm-blooded. Anna is a name for a human. a human is a kind of mammal. a (hot ; warm) something is a source of heat. (temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). warm means medium (heat energy ; temperature). melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. an ice cube is a kind of solid. the body of a warm-blooded animal is usually warm in temperature. a mammal is a kind of animal. if (a thermal conductor ; an object) is exposed to a source of heat then (that conductor ; that object) may become (hot ; warm). an ice cube is a kind of object. if (one surface ; one substance ; one object) touches something then one is exposed to that something. a surface is a part of an object. if one is holding an object then one is touching that object. a thermal energy conductor transfers heat from (warmer objects ; hotter objects) to cooler objects. ice is cold in temperature. transferring is moving from one place to another place. 
a force continually acting on an object in the same direction that the object is moving can cause that object 's speed to increase in a forward motion. a ball is a kind of object. rolling is a kind of motion. push is a kind of (force ; application of force). faster means (an increase ; higher) in speed. when a force is applied to an object , that force is acting on that object. 
(stop ; stopped) means (zero ; 0 ; no) speed. a force acting on an object in the opposite direction that the object is moving can cause that object 's speed to decrease in a forward motion. when a force is applied to an object , that force is acting on that object. push is a kind of (force ; application of force). rolling is a kind of motion. 
Earth is a kind of planet. (gravity ; gravitational force) causes (objects that have mass ; substances) (to be pulled down ; to fall) on a planet. downward means down. to cause means to have an effect. 
(gravity ; gravitational force) causes (objects that have mass ; substances) (to be pulled down ; to fall) on a planet. causing is a kind of affecting. Earth is a kind of planet. 
plants absorb (nutrients ; water ; oxygen) from soil into themselves through their roots. taking in something means (receiving ; absorbing ; getting) something. some minerals are sometimes nutrients. 
plants absorb (nutrients ; water ; oxygen) from soil into themselves through their roots. roots are a part of a (plant ; tree). absorbing is a kind of function. something 's function can be used to (describe ; identify) that something. 
a stem is a source of support for a plant. to provide something means to be the source of that something. 
a flower is a kind of plant. a daisy is a kind of flower. a stem is often a part of plant. a stem is a source of support for a plant. 
a vine is a kind of stem. a stem is a source of support for a plant. a stem is often a part of plant. a trunk is a part of a tree for supporting the tree. a trunk is a source of support for a tree. provide is similar to (give ; make). to provide something means to be the source of that something. an oak is a kind of tree. an ivy plant is a kind of plant. providing is a kind of function. similar means in common. if two things perform the same function then those two things are similar. 
a flower is a part of a plant for (attracting pollinators ; producing seeds). attracting is a kind of (function ; activity). producing is a kind of function. make means produce. 
An insect is a pollinating animal. a fly is a kind of insect. carrion means rotting (meat ; flesh). a flower is a part of a plant for (attracting pollinators ; producing seeds). the smell of rotting meat attracts flies. pollinator means pollinating animal. a carrion flower has a carrion-like smell. 
if an organism dies then the population of that organism will decrease. killing means harming something causing death. death means to die. an insect is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. an apple tree is a kind of plant. (plant reproduction ; seed production) requires pollination. pollination requires (pollinators ; pollinating animals). make means produce. if an organism dies then that organism can not perform its function. pollinating is a kind of function. if an organism dies then the population of that organism will decrease. 
seeing requires light. night is low (in light ; in visibility). fragrance means smell. a flower is a part of a plant for (attracting pollinators ; producing seeds). flowers often have a sweet smell to attract pollinators. a flower 's petals often are bright in color to attract pollinators. smell is a kind of sense. finding something requires sensing that something. seeing is used for sensing visual things. color is a kind of (physical ; visual) property. pollination is when (pollinating animals ; wind ; water) carry pollen from one flower to another flower. pollinator means pollinating animal. to be used for something means to help to do that something. 
the skeletal system protects internal organs. the skeletal system is a kind of body system. a brain is a kind of internal organ. protecting something means preventing harm to that something. to bump means to hit. hitting something causes harm to that something. 
a heart is a kind of organ. the heart is mostly made of muscle. 
waving is a kind of motion. the muscular system is a kind of body system. the muscular system contains muscles. muscles (push ; pull) bones to move the bones. a limb often contains bones. an arm is a kind of limb. 
nerves can be used to feel heat and pressure on the skin. nerves are made of nerve cells. to be used for something means to help to do that something. 
the skin is the largest organ in the human body. skin is a kind of organ. 
flexibility is a property of a material. skin is a kind of material. skin is flexible. flexible means high flexibility. the properties of something are used for describing that something. 
when the body is hot , sweat is produced to cool the body. sweat (cools ; helps to cool) a body. staying cool has a positive impact on a human 's comfort. helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
person is synonymous with human. a human is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. good bacteria have a positive impact on a living thing 's (survival ; health). helping something has a positive impact on that something. good bacteria grow on (the skin ; a human 's skin). having a positive impact on (health ; survival) is synonymous with helping to keep healthy. 
(thick fur ; thick feathers) can be used for keeping warm. hair is similar to fur. (hair ; fur) is a part of skin for (protection ; keeping warm). to be used for something means to help to do that something. skin is a part of an animal. person is synonymous with human. a human is a kind of animal. 
an estuary is a kind of body of water. a body of water contains water. water is often brackish in an estuary. often is similar to likely. 
a leaf is a part of a green plant. a leaf performs (photosynthesis ; gas exchange). photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. sugar is a kind of simple carbohydrate. 
a leaf is a part of a green plant. chloroplast is a part of a plant cell. chlorophyll is used for absorbing light energy by plants. to absorb means to capture. if something is a part of something then that something can be found in that something. most chloroplasts are found in the leaves of a plant. a chloroplast contains chlorophyll. sunlight is a kind of light. light means light energy. a leaf performs (photosynthesis ; gas exchange). photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. to be found in means to be contained in. the sun is a source of (light ; light energy) called sunlight. 
a desert environment has low rainfall. weather is a property of a environment. a desert is a kind of environment. rainfall is the amount of rain an area receives. an environment means an area. place means area. precipitation is a kind of weather. rain is a kind of precipitation. a schoolyard is a kind of place. little means low in amount. receive means get. 
the North Star does not move in the sky in the Northern Hemisphere each night. moving changes position. to remain means to not change. if something does not move then that something can be found in the same location. (place ; location) is synonymous with position. 
a telescope is a kind of instrument for (observing celestial objects ; observing the sky). a telescope is used for observing (stars ; planets ; moons ; distant objects ; the sky ; celestial objects). a moon is a kind of celestial (object ; body). best means most positive. to be used for something means to help to do that something. helping something has a positive impact on that something. observe means see. 
a plant is a kind of living thing. a (plants ; living things) require water for (survival ; to grow). (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. 
the rainbow is made of all different colors. refracting (sunlight ; light) causes (sunlight ; light) to split into different colors. light means light energy. to cause means to result in. a rainbow is formed by refraction of light by splitting light into all different colors. 
water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). snow is a kind of ice. form means kind. fog is formed by water vapor condensing in the air. water is in the gas state , called water vapor , for temperatures between (373 ; 212 ; 100) and 100000000000 (K ; F ; C). state means form. hail is a kind of (precipitation ; ice). rain is a kind of water. 
snow is a kind of ice. water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. to turn means to change. 
evaporation is a kind of process. the sun is the source of solar energy called sunlight. solar energy is a kind of energy. if something comes from something else then that something else is a source of that something. (boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. solar energy is a kind of heat energy. 
condensing means changing from a gas into a liquid by reducing heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. water is in the gas state , called water vapor , for temperatures between (373 ; 212 ; 100) and 100000000000 (K ; F ; C). moisture means (liquid ; liquid water). condensing causes a liquid to form. breath contains water vapor. 
a hill is more rounded than a mountain. soil erosion is a kind of (slow ; natural) process. sometimes weathering (smooths ; rounds) rocks. weathering is a kind of erosion. a mountain is made of (rocks ; soil). to round means to make more round. 
a delta is formed by deposition of sediment at the mouth of a river by water fanning out. 
skills are learned characteristics. swimming is a kind of skill. a behavior is a kind of characteristic. 
some dogs are trained to bark when they want to go outside. if an animal is trained to do something then that something is a learned behavior. a dog is a kind of animal. 
communication can be used to warn people of dangers. a television can be used for communication. bad weather is dangerous. car accidents are dangerous. warning people of dangers has a positive impact on the safety of those people. to improve means to have a positive impact. 
studying fossils is used to learn about organisms from long ago. a plant is a kind of organism. an environment is similar to an ecosystem. an ecosystem contains (a large community of ; large numbers of) living organisms in a particular place. an organism is a living thing. if studying something is used to learn about something then that something is a source of information. to provide something means to be the source of that something. 
seed dispersal has a positive impact on (a plant ; a plant 's reproduction). seed dispersal is when the seeds of a plant (are moved ; are carried ; are spread ; are dropped ; ) from the parent plant to another area. helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
a star is usually larger than a planet. the Sun is a kind of star. Earth is a kind of planet. 
a tree is a kind of plant. plants absorb (nutrients ; water ; oxygen) from soil into themselves through their roots. roots are a vehicle for absorbing water and nutrients from soil into the plant. to be a vehicle for is a kind of function. 
a seed is used for storing food for a new plant. the function of something is what that something is used to do. 
changes in an environment cause (animals ; plants) to adapt to survive. a tree is a kind of plant. an adaptation is a kind of change. 
a leaf performs (photosynthesis ; gas exchange). photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. a leaf is a part of a green plant. 
(boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. ability to undergo a phase change is a property of a (substance ; material). boiling is a kind of phase change. the properties of something can be (used to identify ; used to describe) that something. 
a measuring cup is a kind of tool for measuring the volume of substances. a measuring cup is used for measuring the volume of substances. water is a kind of substance. a thermometer is a kind of instrument for measuring temperature. a thermometer is used to measure temperature. instrument means tool. 
the sun transfers (solar energy ; light energy ; heat energy) from itself to the (planets ; Earth) through sunlight. heat means heat energy. light means light energy. transferring is similar to supplying. 
a meter stick is a kind of tool for (measuring length ; measuring distance). a meter stick is used to measure (distance ; height ; length). 
soil erosion is a kind of (slow ; natural) process. soil erosion means soil loss through (wind ; water ; animals). erosion is a kind of change. a process is a kind of event. natural events usually cause changes to Earth 's surface. 
a frog eats insects. if an organism eats something then that something is a source of frood to that organism. a frog is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. food is a kind of resource. if two animals eat the same prey then those animals compete for that pey. predators eat prey. if an animal eats another animal then that animal is a carnivore or omnivore or predator. an insect is a kind of animal. 
a backbone is a part of a vertebrate animal. a part of something means a characteristic of something. 
fast means quickly. some animals move quickly to escape predators. a rabbit is a kind of animal. running is a kind of movement. avoiding predators has a positive impact on (prey 's ; an organism 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). an animal is a kind of organism. escape means avoid. a positive impact is a benefit. to make something easier means to help. helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
a leaf absorbs sunlight to perform photosynthesis. collecting is similar to absorbing. photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. a plant requires sunlight for photosynthesis. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. a sunflower is a kind of plant. a leaf is a part of a green plant. 
sediment is formed by weathering. weathering means breaking down (rocks ; surface materials) from larger whole into smaller pieces by weather. 
freezing means changing from a liquid into a solid by reducing heat energy. becoming is similar to changing. juice is a kind of liquid. a freezer is used for cooling things. (cooling ; colder) means (removing ; reducing ; decreasing) (heat ; temperature). heat means heat energy. 
volume is a property of matter. (size ; amount) means volume. a measuring cup is a kind of tool for measuring the volume of substances. a measuring cup is used for measuring the volume of substances. juice is a kind of liquid. liquid is a kind of state of matter. 
a producer is a source of energy for consumers. In the food chain process an animal has the role of consumer which eats (producers ; other animals) for food. food is a source of energy for (animals ; plants). living things all require energy for survival. an animal is a kind of living thing. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. 
a plain is a kind of environment. a type is synonymous with a kind. freezing means cold temperatures. if the (environmental temperature ; air temperature) is too cold then (an animal ; a living thing) in that environment may become cold. a mammal is a kind of animal. if a living thing becomes too cold then that living thing will die. an animal is a kind of living thing. (nonliving ; non-living ; die) is the opposite of (living ; alive ; live). survive means live. staying warm has a positive impact on an animal 's (survival ; health). best means most positive. (thick fur ; thick feathers) can be used for keeping warm. staying warm means keeping warm. to be fit for an environment means to be able to survive in that environment. 
migration is when animals move themselves from a cooler climate to a warmer climate for the winter. a goose is a kind of bird. a bird is a kind of animal. cold environments usually have little food for animals. (colder ; cooler) means lower in temperature. a climate is synonymous with an environment. a warm environment usually has more food than a cold environment. migration is an instinctive behavior. if the amount of available food and water decreases in an environment then animals may leave that environment to find food and water. little is similar to decrease. increase means more. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. leaving is a kind of movement. 
hibernation is an inherited behavior. 
storing water is a kind of adaptation. storing water increases the water available to organisms in a dry environment. an adaptation is a kind of characteristic. a plant is a kind of organism. a desert environment is dry. a (plants ; living things) require water for (survival ; to grow). survive means live. the decrease of something required by an organism has a negative impact on that organism 's survival. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
winter has cold (temperatures ; weather). cold environments usually have little food for animals. climate is the usual kind of weather in a location. a climate is synonymous with an environment. little is similar to decrease. food is a source of energy for (animals ; plants). living things all require energy for survival. a bear is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. an organism is a living thing. hibernation is used for conserving (energy ; resources) by some animals. an energy source is a kind of resource. using less of a resource means conserving that resource. using less of a resource increases the availability of that resource. the decrease of something required by an organism has a negative impact on that organism 's survival. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. helping something has a positive impact on that something. hibernation is an inherited behavior. an instinctive behavior is a kind of (inherited characteristic ; behavioral adaptation). 
plants are a source of oxygen through photosynthesis. if something releases something else then that something is the source of that something else. an animal requires oxygen for (survival ; to breathe). a fish is a kind of animal. to be used for something means to be required by that something. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. oxygen is a kind of gas. 
green plants are a kind of producer. photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. sugar is a kind of simple carbohydrate. sunlight is a kind of light. food is a source of energy for (animals ; plants). In the food chain process an animal has the role of consumer which eats (producers ; other animals) for food. green plants provide food for (themselves ; animals ; consumers) by performing photosynthesis. (eating ; taking in) food is used to get (nutrients ; energy) by (animals ; living things). 
a windmill does not create pollution. pollution has a negative impact on the (environment ; air quality). negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. advantage has a positive impact on something. 
fur is usually part of a mammal. hair is similar to fur. fur is often part of an animal. a mammal is a kind of animal. a part of something means a characteristic of something. 
trees are a source of paper. recycling (resources ; nonrenewable resources) has a positive impact on the (environment ; conservation of those resources). trees are a kind of resource. helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
muscles (push ; pull) bones to move the bones. muscle cells are a part of muscles. causing is a kind of function. 
to be used for something means to help to do that something. a thermometer is a kind of instrument for measuring temperature. a thermometer is used to measure temperature. investigating sometimes requires measuring. 
a telescope is used for observing (stars ; planets ; moons ; distant objects ; the sky ; celestial objects). learning about something sometimes requires observing that something. 
decomposition is when a decomposer (recycles ; returns) nutrients from dead organisms to the soil by eating those dead organisms. a plant is a kind of organism. an earthworm is a kind of decomposer. (high quality ; rich ; good) soil has a high number of nutrients. high-quality means positive. to improve means to have a positive impact. an organism is a source of organic material. 
(temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). temperature is a measure of heat energy. usually a slide is located at a playground. playground is located outside. if something is outside during the day then that something will receive sunlight. to receive sunlight means to absorb sunlight. if (an object ; something) is in the sunlight then (that object ; that something) will absorb solar energy. a slide is a kind of object. solar energy is a kind of heat energy. the sun is a source of (radiation ; heat) called sunlight. 
living things all require energy for survival. a rabbit is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. a plant is a kind of living thing. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. 
gravity pulls objects towards planets. a rocket is a kind of vehicle. a vehicle is a kind of object. Earth is a kind of planet. toward is the opposite of away. an object acting against a force can cause that object to move in the opposite direction. toward is a kind of direction. away is a kind of direction. 
carbon dioxide is a kind of gas. gas is a kind of substance. animals exhale carbon dioxide from their lungs into the air. to exhale means to release. a plant absorbs carbon dioxide from the air for photosynthesis. take in means absorb. 
a telescope is used for observing (stars ; planets ; moons ; distant objects ; the sky ; celestial objects). if (something ; an invention ; a discovery) is (invented ; discovered) then (that something ; that invention ; that discovery) can be used. discovering something usually requires seeing that something. observe means see. 
(temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). temperature is a measure of heat energy. solar energy is a kind of heat energy. if (an object ; something) is in the sunlight then (that object ; that something) will absorb solar energy. if something is outside during the day then that something will receive sunlight. to receive sunlight means to absorb sunlight. usually a body of water is located outside. a pond is a kind of body of water. if something absorbs something else then that something will contain that something else. containing something is similar to holding something. 
light years ( ly ) are a unit used for measuring (length ; distance) generally used for values between 1 and 27000000000. 
if an organism eats something then that something is a source of frood to that organism. . an (animal ; living thing) requires nutrients for survival. an animal is a kind of organism. an organism is a living thing. a cat is a kind of animal. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. carnivores only eat animals. a cat is a kind of carnivore. 
as the ability of a building to move with land increases , the likelihood of that building collapsing decreases during an earthquake. buildings collapsing often cause death. saving an organism 's life means preventing the death of that organism. to prevent the occurence of an event means to decrease the occurence of the event. events occur (at a specific place ; at a specific time ; with a specific frequency). killing means harming something causing death. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. helping something has a positive impact on that something. person is synonymous with human. a human is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. 
if an animal lives under ground then that animal will be protected from a wild fire. protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). an animal is a kind of living thing. a living thing surviving has a positive impact on that living thing 's ability to compete for resources. 
microorganisms cause food to spoil. food spoiling has a negative impact on the health of the animal that eats that food. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. a positive impact is a benefit. 
a microorganism is a kind of decomposer. decomposition is when a decomposer breaks down dead organisms. decomposition is when a decomposer (recycles ; returns) nutrients from dead organisms to the soil by eating those dead organisms. returning is similar to adding. an organism is a source of organic material. a microorganism is a part of a compost pile. 
a compass 's needle lines up with Earth 's magnetic poles. when the needle of a compass lines up with Earth 's magnetic poles , the needle points north. 
(boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. 
nutrients are a source of energy for living things. person is synonymous with human. a human is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. (eating ; taking in) food is used to get (nutrients ; energy) by (animals ; living things). 
exercise has a positive impact on a body 's strength. a heart is a part of the body. strong means high in strength. impact means effect. 
a cut is a kind of wound. a scratch is a kind of wound. zinc is a kind of mineral. zinc has a positive impact on the healing of wounds. helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
dairy is a source of Vitamin D. Vitamin D (strengthens ; heals) bones. breaking a part of the body means breaking a bone in that part of the body. a wrist is a part of the body. broken bones require healing. dairy is a kind of food. a type is synonymous with a kind. 
shiny (things ; objects) reflect light. a ball is a kind of object. 
solid is a kind of state of matter. liquid is a kind of state of matter. gas is a kind of state of matter. 
work is a measure of the product of force and distance. pushing on the pedals of a bike cause that bike to move. push is a kind of (force ; application of force). riding something is a kind of movement. (distance moved ; distance travelled) is a measure of how far an object moves. a bicycle is a kind of object. bike means bicycle. a kind of something is an example of that something. 
potential energy is a measure of the energy of an object due to position. 
genes are a vehicle for passing inherited characteristics from parent to offspring. trait is synonymous with characteristic. parents are a part of a generation. offspring are a part of a generation. to be a vehicle for is a kind of function. to have a function is similar to to be responsible for. 
pollination is a kind of process for plant reproduction. reproduction is when an organism passes genetic information from itself to its offspring. a plant is a kind of organism. 
greatest means (largest ; highest ; most). the amount of daylight is greatest on the summer solstice. winter in a hemisphere occurs when the Pole located in that hemisphere is tilted away from the Sun. winter is the opposite of summer. The North Pole is located in the northern hemisphere. toward is the opposite of away. United States is located in the northern hemisphere. 
weathering means breaking down (rocks ; surface materials) from larger whole into smaller pieces by weather. 
a seismograph is a kind of tool for measuring the size of an earthquake. device means tool. a seismograph is used for measuring the size of an earthquake. 
winter in the Northern Hemisphere is during the summer in the Southern Hemisphere. migration is an instinctive behavior. migration is when animals move themselves from a cooler climate to a warmer climate for the winter. a bird is a kind of animal. flying is a kind of motion air. winter has cold (temperatures ; weather). summer has hot (temperatures ; weather). (temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). the Southern Hemisphere is located south of the Northern Hemisphere. 
eye color is an inherited characteristic. trait is synonymous with characteristic. the colors of the parts of an organism are inherited characteristics. eyes are usually part of an animal for seeing. a human is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. 
winter is a kind of season. United States is located in the northern hemisphere. winter in a hemisphere occurs when the Pole located in that hemisphere is tilted away from the Sun. The North Pole is located in the northern hemisphere. north is the opposite of south. toward is the opposite of away. 
a bone is a part of some animals. an animal is a kind of organism. (fossil fuels ; fossils) are formed by dead organisms over time. 
the Earth revolves around the sun. the Earth revolving around the sun causes stars to appear in different areas in the sky at different times of year. 
Earth radiates heat into outer space. as heat is transferred from something to something else , the temperature of that something will decrease. radiation is when heat is transferred through (waves ; particles). (cooling ; colder) means (removing ; reducing ; decreasing) (heat ; temperature). if (a thermal conductor ; an object) is exposed to a source of heat then (that conductor ; that object) may become (hot ; warm). a planet is a kind of celestial (object ; body). Earth is a kind of planet. a planet is exposed to the heat of the star around which it revolves. the Sun is a kind of star. the Earth revolves around the sun. the sun is a source of (radiation ; heat) called sunlight. (temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). the sun transfers (solar energy ; light energy ; heat energy) from itself to the (planets ; Earth) through sunlight. if something transfers energy to something else then that something else absorbs that energy. take in means absorb. the Earth absorbs more energy than it loses. if there is a loss of something then that something decreases. 
(animals ; living things) require water for survival. life means living things. to be required means to be necessary. 
decomposition increases the amount of nutrients in the soil. to add means to increase. (high quality ; rich ; good) soil has a high number of nutrients. high is similar to increase. to contribute means to add. decomposition is when a decomposer breaks down dead organisms. an organism is a source of organic matter. 
chlorophyll is a kind of pigment. chlorophyll is green in color. chlorophyll is used for absorbing light energy by plants. to be used for is similar to allowing. using a raw material sometimes requires absorbing that raw material. In the photosynthesis process (carbon dioxide ; water ; sunlight) has the role of raw material. the sun is a source of (light ; light energy) called sunlight. photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. to convert means to change. food is a kind of chemical energy. 
a rabbit is a kind of herbivore. herbivore means first-level consumer. 
habitat destruction causes animals to move to find shelter in another habitat. to cause means to result in. a bird is a kind of animal. a nest is a kind of shelter for birds. nest building is a kind of adaptation. a water tower is a kind of habitat for birds. an animal requires shelter. requiring is similar to needing help. helping something has a positive impact on that something. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). 
a desert environment usually has a lot of sunlight. a desert environment is dry. storing water increases the water available to organisms in a dry environment. a plant is a kind of organism. a (plants ; living things) require water for (survival ; to grow). a stem is used to store water by some plants. as the size of a leaf increases , the amount of sunlight absorbed by that leaf will increase. lots means much. 
endangered means low in population. if an (animal 's ; organisms) habitat (no longer exists ; ceases to exist) then (that animal ; that organism) will die. to be destroyed means to cease to exist. destruction means to destroy. destruction means loss. if an organism dies then the population of that organism will decrease. to lower means to decrease. die out means become extinct. if a population decreases to zero then that organism is extinct. 
cooking causes a chemical reaction. chemical reactions cause chemical change. frying food is a kind of cooking. an egg is a kind of food. 
echo is when sound reflects off of a surface. sound waves means sound energy. sound is a kind of sound energy. 
fossils are formed when layers of sediment cover the remains of organisms over time. nearly all fossils are found in sedimentary rock. sedimentary rocks often have different colored layers. sedimentary rocks are formed from sediment (compacting ; cementing) together. die out means become extinct. if a living thing dies then that living thing is dead. an organism is a living thing. (fossil fuels ; fossils) are formed by dead organisms over time. 
season is a major yearly temperature change. a new season occurs four times per year. 
planets orbit stars. an orbit is a kind of regular path. revolving around something means orbiting that something. revolving is a kind of motion. the Sun is a kind of star. 
when a cooler object touches a warmer object , thermal conduction occurs. water is a kind of object. if something is dropped into a container of something else then that something is touching that something else. a pail is a kind of container. (temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). a rock is a kind of object. thermal conduction is when materials conduct heat through those materials. heat means heat energy. to conduct is similar to to transfer. 
an insulator is the opposite of a conductor. plastic is usually an electrical insulator. An electrical conductor is a vehicle for the flow of electricity. a vehicle for something (allows ; enables) that something to occur. 
electrical conduction is when (metals ; electrical conductors) conduct electricity through (a wire ; electrical conductor ; metal). a wire is a part of an electrical circuit for conducting electricity. a light bulb requires electrical energy to produce light. to give off means to be the source of. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. a complete electrical circuit is a source of electrical energy. completing a circuit causes (electricity ; electric current) to flow through that circuit. if something is required for something else then that something allows that something else. 
the Sun is a kind of star. nuclear reactions in stars causes stars to produce (light ; energy ; nuclear energy). a star is a source of (light ; light energy) through nuclear reactions. nuclear fusion is a kind of nuclear reaction. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. 
a lever is a kind of simple machine. a softball bat is a kind of lever. a lever can be used to hit an object. a kind of something is an example of that something. a ball is a kind of object. a softball is a kind of ball. 
if a plant is (planted ; growing) somewhere then that plant is located there. most ferns are located along rivers. a fern is a kind of plant. a plant requires water to grow. a river is a kind of flowing body of water. a body of water contains water. 
a drop is a small amount of liquid. clouds are formed by water vapor rising and condensing. water is in the gas state , called water vapor , for temperatures between (373 ; 212 ; 100) and 100000000000 (K ; F ; C). a droplet is a kind of little drop. condensing means liquid water coming together in the air. coming together means forming a group. 
An example of navigation is directing a boat. a boat is similar to a ship. knowledge of the stars can be used to navigate. 
a radio is a kind of electrical device. electric devices require electrical energy to function. if (something ; an invention ; a discovery) is (invented ; discovered) then (that something ; that invention ; that discovery) can be used. to be used for something means to be required by that something. to be required means to be necessary. electricity means electrical energy. 
when both a dominant and recessive gene are present , the dominant trait will be (visible ; expressed). 
a reptile is cold-blooded. a bird is warm-blooded. warm-blooded is the opposite of cold-blooded. opposite is a kind of different. 
a mammal is warm-blooded. a mammal is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. a mammal usually nurses (its young ; its offspring). 
green plants provide food for (themselves ; animals ; consumers) by performing photosynthesis. a plant is made of plant cells. In the photosynthesis process oxygen has the role of waste product. 
trees are a renewable resource. a forest contains (plants ; trees). An example of replacing a natural resource is planting new trees where a forest once stood. a renewable resource is a kind of natural resource. 
solar energy is a renewable resource. a source of heat can be used to heat something. a house is a kind of home. electricity sometimes is used for heating (buildings ; substances). a home is a kind of building. a homeowner is a kind of human. some humans live in houses. a solar panel converts sunlight into electricity. sunlight is a kind of solar energy. an energy source is a kind of resource. 
a dandelion is a kind of flower. a flower is a kind of plant. roots are a part of a (plant ; tree). plants absorb (nutrients ; water ; oxygen) from soil into themselves through their roots. some minerals are sometimes nutrients. take in means absorb. 
a spider web is used to capture food by spiders. to be used for something means to help to do that something. 
(an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). the Arctic Ocean is a kind of ocean. an ocean is a kind of body of water. a body of water contains water. floating on water is a kind of adaptation. helping something has a positive impact on that something. a bear is a kind of animal. a polar bear is a kind of bear. fat can be used to float on water by an animal. to be used for something means to help to do that something. 
protecting something means preventing harm to that something. using a car causes pollution. helping something has a positive impact on that something. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. riding a bike does not cause pollution. polluting means (something harmful ; something poisonous) is added to an environment causing harm to the environment. (riding in ; driving in) a vehicle means using that vehicle. a car is a kind of vehicle. 
water is in the liquid state , called liquid water , for temperatures between (273 ; 32 ; 0) and (373 ; 212 ; 100) (K ; F ; C). water is in the gas state , called water vapor , for temperatures between (373 ; 212 ; 100) and 100000000000 (K ; F ; C). evaporation is a kind of process. (boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. 
microscope is used to see (small things ; microscopic things ; specimens) by making them appear bigger. a microscope is a kind of tool for observing small things. a cell is very small. an animal cell is a kind of cell. a plant cell is a kind of cell. comparing requires observing that something. observe means see. to be used for something means to help to do that something. helping something has a positive impact on that something. best means most positive. 
to give off means to be the source of. plants are a source of oxygen through photosynthesis. an animal requires oxygen for (survival ; to breathe). (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. producing is similar to causing. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. to cause means to result in. 
a complete revolution of the Earth around the sun takes (1 ; one) (year ; solar year ; Earth year). a motion is a kind of (event ; action). revolving is a kind of motion. 
an television set is a kind of electrical device. electric devices require electrical energy to function. to work means to function. electrical energy is a kind of energy. form means kind. 
(an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). helping something has a positive impact on that something. a worm has a tube-like body. a tube-like body has a positive impact on moving through soil. a worm is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. 
erosion causes a river to become deeper and wider. 
a plateau is formed by a buildup of cooled lava. 
limestone is formed by water evaporating from a solution of water and minerals. to cause the formation of means to form. 
the Sun is a kind of star. gravity causes orbits. planets orbit stars. 
(steam ; water vapor) is a kind of water above 100 degrees celsius. condensing means changing from a gas into a liquid by reducing heat energy. (boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. a phase change is when (matter ; a substance) changes from one state into another state. liquid is a kind of state of matter. gas is a kind of state of matter. a phase change is a kind of physical change. water is a kind of substance. a type is synonymous with a kind. 
electricity is made of (moving charges ; moving charged particles). charge is a property of (an object ; a material ; a substance) and includes ordered values of (negatively-charged ; neutral ; positively-charged). electricity means electrical energy. 
powering an electrical device with a battery requires a path for electricity to flow through a closed circuit. a wire is a kind of path for electricity. a light bulb is a kind of electrical device. 
depth is a property of the shape of an object. width is a property of (size ; shape) and includes ordered values of (narrow ; wide). erosion causes a river to become deeper and wider. soil erosion is a kind of (slow ; natural) process. gradual means slow. a riverbed is a part of a river. to cause means to result in. deeper means greater in depth. wider means greater in width. greater means (higher ; more) in value. increase means more. an increase is a kind of change. 
Earth has a rocky terrain in some places. the Moon has a rocky terrain. 
protecting something means preventing harm to that something. if too much heat is transferred to an object then that object may burn. burning a living thing usually causes harm to that living thing. safe is the opposite of (harm ; danger). a glove is a covering around the hand for protection. a glove is a kind of tool. a thermal insulator (slows ; prevents) the transfer of heat. an insulator is insulated. a hand is a kind of object. helping something has a positive impact on that something. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. a student is a kind of human. a human is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. 
a container is a kind of object. a cup is a kind of drinking container. a type is synonymous with a kind. something reusable can be used more than once. An example of conservation is avoiding waste. An example of avoiding waste is using (an object ; a material) more than once. conservation is often conserving natural resources. 
a butterfly is a kind of insect. an insect is a kind of animal. a container with air holes in the top is a kind of tool. a jar is a kind of container. a container with air holes in the top can be used for (holding ; capturing) an animal. capturing an animal can be used for studying that animal. studying is similar to investigating. to be used for something means to help to do that something. an animal requires oxygen for (survival ; to breathe). air holes in a container are often used for providing oxygen to an animal in that container. survive means live. live means to be alive. investigating the life cycle of a living thing requires that living thing to be alive. an animal is a kind of living thing. 
paper is recyclable. recycling reduces the resources needed to make something. trees are a kind of resource. recyclable means a material can be recycled. paper is a kind of material. creating paper requires cutting down trees. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. to create means to make. if something has a positive impact on something else then that something is important to that something else. recycling has a positive impact on the environment. 
studying is similar to investigating. scientists make observations. studying is similar to observing. 
metal is an (electrical ; electrical energy) conductor. metal is a (thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. metal is a kind of material. heat energy is synonymous with thermal energy. heat means heat energy. electricity means electrical energy. 
melting point can be used to identify a pure substance. characteristic means property. melting point is a property of a (substance ; material). the properties of something can be (used to identify ; used to describe) that something. 
solar energy is a kind of light. light can travel through a vacuum. form means kind. 
(glass ; objects made of glass) cause refraction of light. an eyeglass lens is often made of glass. an eyeglass lens is a kind of object. lenses are a part of eyeglasses. to cause means to result in. refractions of light can be used to help a person see. 
sound is a kind of air vibration. vibrating matter can produce sound. musical instruments make sound when they are played. playing a drum means (banging ; hitting) a drum. to bang means to hit. producing is similar to causing. a drum is a kind of musical instrument. 
rock means stone. weathering is a kind of process. weathering means breaking down (rocks ; surface materials) from larger whole into smaller pieces by weather. to turn means to change. break down means change from a whole into pieces. 
soil and sediment deposited by a river are usually (high ; rich) in nutrients. when a river floods , that river deposits (soil ; sediment) in flood plains. flood plains are located near rivers. a floodplain is a kind of (land ; landform). fertile soil is high in quality. (high quality ; rich ; good) soil has a high number of nutrients. 
(fossil fuels ; fossils) are formed by dead organisms over time. remains mean parts of a dead organism. 
gravity causes orbits. planets orbit stars. the Sun is a kind of star. gravity is a kind of force. 
an organism is made of organic matter. materials are made of matter. coal is a kind of fossil fuel. forming (coal ; fossil fuels) requires decaying vegetation. vegetation means plants. a plant is a kind of organism. 
sedimentary is a kind of rock. a type is synonymous with a kind. sedimentary rocks are formed from sediment (compacting ; cementing) together. sediment is formed by weathering. 
a delta is formed by deposition of sediment at the mouth of a river by water fanning out. to cause means to result in. to cause the formation of means to form. 
sometimes weathering (smooths ; rounds) rocks. a mountain is made of (rocks ; soil). to round means to make more round. increase means more. an increase is a kind of change. weathering is a kind of erosion. (rocks ; soil ; materials) interacting with (wind ; moving water) over long periods of time causes weathering. becoming is similar to changing. 
an equinox occurs twice per year. events occur (at a specific place ; at a specific time ; with a specific frequency). 
solar energy is a kind of energy. form means kind. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. a leaf absorbs sunlight to perform photosynthesis. a leaf is a part of a green plant. a plant requires sunlight for photosynthesis. to absorb means to capture. 
(thick fur ; thick feathers) can be used for keeping warm. if a living thing becomes too cold then that living thing will die. if the (environmental temperature ; air temperature) is too cold then (an animal ; a living thing) in that environment may become cold. staying warm means keeping warm. keeping warm is the opposite of becoming cold. an animal is a member of an animal species. fat is used to keep animals warm. an animal is a kind of organism. an organism is a living thing. dying is the opposite of (living ; surviving). an environment means an area. climate is the usual kind of weather in a location. (temperature ; heat energy) is a property of (objects ; weather) and includes ordered values of (cold ; cool ; warm ; hot). an increase is a kind of change. if something has a positive impact on something else then increasing the amount of that something has a positive impact on that something else. helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
a polar bear is a kind of bear. a bear is a kind of animal. blending in is synonymous with hiding. camouflage is a kind of adaptation for hiding in an environment. An example of camouflage is when something (is ; has) the same color as its environment. white is a kind of color. snow is white in color. cold environments are usually white in color from being covered in snow. polar bears live in cold environments. 
a plant is a kind of living thing. soil and sediment deposited by a river are usually (high ; rich) in nutrients. (high quality ; rich ; good) soil has a high number of nutrients. a (plant ; living thing) requires nutrients to grow. if something is required for a process then that something positively impacts that process. a positive impact is a helpful effect. when a river floods , that river deposits (soil ; sediment) in flood plains. growing is a kind of process. increase means more. high is similar to increase. fertile soil is high in quality. 
uneven heating of the Earth 's surface cause wind. heating means adding heat. to add means to increase. an increase is a kind of change. a change is a kind of event. an event is a kind of action. 
as heat and moisture increases , the strength of a hurricane will increase. strong means high in strength. to add means to increase. high is similar to increase. an ocean is a source of heat and moisture for a hurricane. a source of something increases the amount of that something. make means produce. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. 
wind is a renewable resource. wind is a source of energy. an energy source is a kind of resource. 
each season occurs once per year. leaves changing color occurs when seasons change. a change is a kind of event. an event is a kind of action. leaves changing color is a kind of process. a leaf is a part of a tree. 
if rocks in an area have many scratches then that area was once covered by glaciers. a sign of something is evidence of that something. to cause means to result in. a result of something is evidence of that something. glaciers cause scratches in rocks. 
a squirrel is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. a tree is a kind of plant. a plant is a kind of organism. a positive impact is a benefit. An example of seed dispersal is is an animal (hiding ; gathering ; burying) seeds. seed dispersal has a positive impact on (a plant ; a plant 's reproduction). squirrels eat (edible plants ; fruit). an animal needs to eat food for nutrients. an (animal ; living thing) requires nutrients for survival. fruit contains seeds. if something is required for a process then that something positively impacts that process. 
some light bulbs convert electricity into light and heat energy. heat is a kind of energy. heat energy is synonymous with thermal energy. form means kind. converting is similar to producing. 
a lake is a kind of body of water. a body of water is a kind of land feature. to cause the formation of means to form. to cause means to result in. some (deep lakes ; bowl-shaped lakes) are formed by glaciers. 
wood is a renewable resource. a tree can be replaced by planting a new tree. replanting a plant means replacing that plant. a tree is a kind of plant. a renewable resource can be replaced. a tree contains wood. 
fossils are formed when layers of sediment cover the remains of organisms over time. nearly all fossils are found in sedimentary rock. sedimentary rocks are formed from sediment (compacting ; cementing) together. extreme heat and pressure compact sediment into sedimentary rock. extreme means very high in value. the bottom of a body of water is the deepest. deepest means greatest in depth. high is similar to increase. greater means (higher ; more) in value. if fossils of a water animal or plant are found in a place then that place used to be covered by water in the past. a seashell is sometimes a part of a water animal. as depth increases , pressure will increase. an animal is a kind of organism. an ocean is a kind of body of water. 
dead organisms decay. decomposition is when a decomposer (recycles ; returns) nutrients from dead organisms to the soil by eating those dead organisms. decomposition increases the amount of nutrients in the soil. a plant is a kind of organism. an animal is a kind of organism. soil is usually part of an environment. an environment is similar to an ecosystem. if something has a positive impact on something else then that something is important to that something else. if something requires something else then that something else is important to that something. if something has a positive impact on something else then increasing the amount of that something has a positive impact on that something else. an (animal ; living thing) requires nutrients for survival. an organism is a living thing. an ecosystem contains (a large community of ; large numbers of) living organisms in a particular place. 
role means niche. omnivores eat (plants ; animals). In the food chain process an animal has the role of consumer which eats (producers ; other animals) for food. consumers eat other organisms. an insect is a kind of animal. meadow voles eat (plants ; insects). a plant is a kind of organism. an animal is a kind of organism. a role in the ecosystem is a role in the food chain process. 
a radiator is a source of heat. a type is synonymous with a kind. to give off means to be the source of. heat is a kind of energy. 
(hunting ; scavenging) is a kind of skill. skills are learned characteristics. a behavior is a kind of characteristic. a kind of something is an example of that something. hunting is when an animal kills another animal to eat that animal. a tiger is a kind of animal. a deer is a kind of animal. 
nocturnal predators hunt during the night. sight is a kind of sense. sight means to see. hunting requires (seeing ; sensing) prey. a sharp sense is an enhanced sense. to enhance means to increase. sight means vision. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. the decrease of something required by an organism has a negative impact on that organism 's survival. night is low (in light ; in visibility). difficulty seeing means visibility decreases. a predator is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. an organism is a living thing. an animal is a member of an animal species. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. hearing is a kind of sense. an animal needs to eat food for nutrients. an (animal ; living thing) requires nutrients for survival. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. sense is a kind of characteristic of an animal. trait is synonymous with characteristic. prey is a kind of food for predators. nocturnal predators hunt during the night. hunting is when an animal kills another animal to eat that animal. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). adaptation is when an organism develops a trait over time for survival. 
a car engine usually converts gasoline into motion and heat through combustion. combustion is a kind of exothermic reaction. an exothermic reaction increases the amount of heat. a car engine is a source of heat. a source of something increases the amount of that something. a demonstration is similar to an example. a kind of something is an example of that something. converting is similar to producing. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. 
a revolution of the moon around the Earth takes (1 ; one) month. 
sugar dissolves in water when they are combined. a solution is made of one substance dissolved in another substance. water is a kind of substance. sugar is a kind of substance. 
the Sun is a kind of star. a star is a source of (light ; light energy) through nuclear reactions. nuclear reactions in stars causes stars to produce (light ; energy ; nuclear energy). a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. 
when a switch in a simple series circuit is closed , electricity will flow through the circuit. a circuit is a kind of electrical component. a closed circuit has continuous path. electricity is made of (moving charges ; moving charged particles). an electron is a kind of charged particle. 
vibrating matter can produce sound. objects are made of (materials ; substances ; matter). a string is a kind of object. a guitar is a kind of musical instrument. a string is a part of a guitar for producing sound. musical instruments make sound when they are played. make means produce. (plucking ; strumming) a string can cause that string to vibrate. An example of playing a musical instrument is strumming a guitar string. 
weathering means breaking down (rocks ; surface materials) from larger whole into smaller pieces by weather. dissolving is similar to breaking down. chemical weathering is a kind of weathering. weathering is a kind of erosion. erosion is a kind of change. acid can cause chemical change. acidic rainwater contains acid. 
nearly all fossils are found in sedimentary rock. (fossil fuels ; fossils) are formed by dead organisms over time. (fossil fuels ; fossils) forming occurs over a period of 300000000 years which is considered a very long time to a human. 
oil is formed by layers of sediment pushing down on decomposing algae. 
omnivores eat (plants ; animals). bears eat (berries ; insects ; animals). a berry contains seeds. a seed is a part of a plant. an insect is a kind of animal. 
An example of seed dispersal is is an animal (hiding ; gathering ; burying) seeds. a squirrel is a kind of animal. to collect means to gather. an acorn is a kind of seed. burying is a kind of hiding. seeds may sprout when buried in soil. In the tree reproduction process a squirrel has the role of seed disperser. a disperser disperses. role means niche. 
the shape of body parts is an inherited characteristic. a beak is a part of a bird. birds with beaks of different shapes eat different foods. 
fur is usually part of a mammal. (thick fur ; thick feathers) can be used for keeping warm. keeping warm is the opposite of becoming cold. if a living thing becomes too cold then that living thing will die. (nonliving ; non-living ; die) is the opposite of (living ; alive ; live). survive means live. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). helping something has a positive impact on that something. if the (environmental temperature ; air temperature) is too cold then (an animal ; a living thing) in that environment may become cold. cold means low in temperature. a mammal is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. 
a meter stick is a kind of tool for (measuring length ; measuring distance). a meter stick is used to measure (distance ; height ; length). 
summer has hot (temperatures ; weather). summer has the most sunlight. a sunny day has lots of sunlight. sunny is a kind of weather. a type is synonymous with a kind. to a human a (air ; environment) temperature of 28 C to 35 C is considered hot. 
hardness is a property of a (material ; an object) and includes ordered values of (malleable ; rigid). a mineral is a kind of (solid ; natural) material. measuring the hardness of minerals requires scratching those materials. to scrape means to scratch. investigating sometimes requires measuring. quartz is a kind of mineral. rock is made of minerals. 
trees are a renewable resource. trees are a source of paper. if something comes from something else then that something else is a source of that something. plastic is a nonrenewable resource. renewable is the opposite of nonrenewable. opposite is a kind of different. 
the moon (revolving around ; orbiting) the Earth causes the phases of the moon. 
adding is a kind of activity. action means activity. adding salt to a liquid decreases the melting point of that liquid. water is a kind of liquid. a decrease is a kind of change. water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). frozen means solid. 
(animals ; living things) require water for survival. an animal requires oxygen for (survival ; to breathe). an animal is a kind of living thing. life means living things. the moon does not contain (air ; water). oxygen is a kind of gas. air is a kind of gas. the Moon has less (water ; air) than Earth. 
to be used for something means to help to do that something. sunglasses are used for reflecting light rays away from the eyes. protecting something means preventing harm to that something. light rays can have a negative impact on the eyes. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. 
a table is hard. a cushion is soft. vibrating matter can produce sound. make means produce. objects are made of (materials ; substances ; matter). a table is a kind of object. a cushion is a kind of object. as the amount that matter vibrates increases , sound produced increases. increase means more. hard objects can vibrate more than soft objects. hitting an object causes the particles in that object to vibrate. particles in objects are a kind of matter. 
weathering is a kind of erosion. sometimes weathering (smooths ; rounds) rocks. a mountain is made of (rocks ; soil). 
(fossil fuels ; fossils) are formed by dead organisms over time. remains mean parts of a dead organism. a plant is a kind of organism. an animal is a kind of organism. oil is a kind of fossil fuel. 
as mass (of a planet ; of a celestial body) increases , the force of gravity on that planet will increase. Earth is a kind of planet. a moon is a kind of celestial (object ; body). size is a property of objects and includes ordered values of (microscopic ; tiny ; small ; medium ; large). mass is similar to size. less is similar to decrease. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. the earth has more mass than the moon. increase means more. 
a magnet attracts (magnetic metals ; ferromagnetic metals) through magnetism. iron is a kind of metal. iron is always magnetic. 
a glove is a covering around the hand for protection. thermal gloves are used for protecting the hand against heat. fire transfers heat through waves. a flame are a part of a fire. if too much heat is transferred to an object then that object may burn. burning a living thing usually causes harm to that living thing. a living thing is a kind of object. safety goggles are used for protecting the eyes during experiments. safety goggles are a kind of safety gear. thermal gloves are a kind of safety gear. protecting something means preventing harm to that something. safe is the opposite of (harm ; danger). 
a magnet attracts (magnetic metals ; ferromagnetic metals) through magnetism. iron is a kind of metal. iron is always magnetic. metal is a kind of material. 
An electrical conductor is a vehicle for the flow of electricity. metal is an (electrical ; electrical energy) conductor. copper is a kind of metal. metal is a kind of material. if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. conductivity is a property of a (material ; substance). a pipe is a kind of object. 
a microscope is a kind of tool for observing small things. microscope is used to see (small things ; microscopic things ; specimens) by making them appear bigger. observe means see. a cell is very small. a cell wall is a part of a plant cell for supporting and protecting the cell membrane. an part of an object is smaller than the entire object. a cell is a kind of object. a leaf is a part of a green plant. a plant is made of plant cells. 
a renewable resource is a kind of naturally replaced resource. a tree can be replaced by planting a new tree. 
a sandbar is formed by water moving sediment downstream. downstream is a kind of direction in a river. 
the moon is the celestial object that is closest to the Earth. the moon orbits the Earth. gravity causes orbits. to cause means to have an effect. as distance from an object decreases , the the pull of gravity on that object increases. a moon is a kind of celestial (object ; body). close means low in distance. to lower means to decrease. greater means (higher ; more) in value. increase means more. 
adding salt to a solid decreases the freezing point of that solid. water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). to lower means to decrease. freezing point is similar to melting point. melting point means temperature (at which a solid melts ; above which a solid melts). 
(thick fur ; thick feathers) can be used for keeping warm. keeping warm is the opposite of becoming cold. if a living thing becomes too cold then that living thing will die. (nonliving ; non-living ; die) is the opposite of (living ; alive ; live). survive means live. if the (environmental temperature ; air temperature) is too cold then (an animal ; a living thing) in that environment may become cold. snow is cold. cold means low in temperature. a rabbit is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. camouflage is a kind of protection (against predators ; from predators ; against consumers). An example of camouflage is when something (is ; has) the same color as its environment. snow is white in color. if an animal 's fur is a color then that animal is that color. protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). helping something has a positive impact on that something. the thickness of the parts of an organism is an inherited characteristic. fur is often part of an animal. an organism is a living thing. thickness is a measure of how thick an object is. snow is a kind of precipitation. precipitation is a kind of weather. weather is a property of a environment. characteristic means property. color is a property of (an object ; a material). a living thing is a kind of object. 
oceans contains most of earth 's water. evaporation is when water is drawn back up into the air in the water cycle. 
hiding is a kind of protection (against predators ; from predators). protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). helping something has a positive impact on that something. a bird is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. camouflage is a kind of adaptation for hiding in an environment. a forest is a kind of environment. An example of camouflage is when something (is ; has) the same color as its environment. brown is a kind of color. bark is usually brown in color. bark is a protective covering around the (trunk of ; branches of) a tree. a forest contains (plants ; trees). 
casting an image of an object through a pinhole onto a screen does not require looking directly at the object. looking directly at an eclipse of the Sun causes harm to the eyes. to watch means to look at. safe is the opposite of (harm ; danger). 
recycling (resources ; nonrenewable resources) has a positive impact on the (environment ; conservation of those resources). trees are a kind of resource. a newspaper is made of paper. trees are a source of paper. to be good for means to have a positive impact on. 
an landfill is a source of pollution. humans move waste to a landfill for (disposal ; storage). recycling (reduces ; decreases) the amount of water sent to landfills. a wise choice is a good choice. good means positive. recycling has a positive impact on the environment. recyclability is a property of a material and includes ordered values of (nonrecyclable ; recyclable). recyclable means a material can be recycled. if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. a can is a kind of object. using raw materials increases waste. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. to reduce means to decrease. 
an insulator is insulated. to be insulated means to have insulation. a thermal insulator (slows ; prevents) the transfer of heat. preventing the transfer of heat from an organims 's body causes that organism to keep warm. sleeping bags usually are made of insulators. 
to wash away is a kind of movement by moving water. pouring water onto soil causes that soil to wash away. 
a balance is used for measuring (mass ; weight) (of an object ; of a substance). 
a carbon monoxide detector is used for warning people that carbon monoxide is present in a building. a carbon monoxide detector is a kind of instrument for warning people that carbon monoxide is present in a building. a home is a kind of building. a resident is a kind of person. carbon monoxide is a kind of gas. carbon monoxide is dangerous. 
(a hand lens ; a magnifying lens) is synonymous with a magnifying glass. a magnifying glass is a kind of tool for observing small things. magnifying glass is used to see small things by making objects appear bigger. observe means see. studying a soil sample means studying the microorganisms in that soil. studying is similar to observing. a microorganism is very small in size. 
if (a thermal conductor ; an object) is exposed to a source of heat then (that conductor ; that object) may become (hot ; warm). (warm ; becoming warm) means heat is added. a burner is a part of a stove. a stove generates heat for cooking usually. if something is places over a heat source then that something is exposed to that heat source. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. heating means adding heat. metal is a (thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. (pot ; pan ; frying pan) is made of metal for cooking. if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. a pan is a kind of object. metal is a kind of material. conductivity is a property of a (material ; substance). a good conductor is a conductor. 
a mirror reflects light. reflection is when a wave bounces off a surface and travels in the opposite direction relative to the angle of incidence. light is a kind of wave. when light hits a reflective object , that light bounces off that object. a mirror is a kind of reflective object. 
camouflage is a kind of adaptation for hiding in an environment. blending in is synonymous with hiding. coloration is a kind of adaptation for (hiding ; camouflage). coloration means a pattern of colors. spotted is a kind of color pattern. if an animal 's fur is a color then that animal is that color. a deer is a kind of animal. coat means fur coat. 
safety goggles are used for protecting the eyes during experiments. investigation sometimes requires experimentation. wearing safety goggles is a kind of safe practice in a laboratory. to protect means to make safe. breaking apart rocks can cause debris. debris can cause harm to an organism. protecting something means preventing harm to that something. a student is a kind of human. a human is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. 
a gram is a kind of unit for measuring mass. (mass ; weight) is a property of (matter ; objects ; materials). 
plants are a source of oxygen through photosynthesis. to give off means to be the source of. oxygen is a kind of gas. 
camouflage is a kind of adaptation for hiding in an environment. an adaptation is a kind of characteristic. blending in is synonymous with hiding. coloration means a pattern of colors. coloration is a kind of adaptation for (hiding ; camouflage). 
as number of organisms in a group increases , the chance of survival of each organism will increase. a fish is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. together means in a group. each is similar to individual. 
photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. photosynthesis (is a source of ; makes) (food ; energy) for the plant by converting carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into carbohydrates. green plants are a kind of producer. sugar is a kind of simple carbohydrate. make means produce. role means function. a producer is a source of sugar in an ecosystem. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. producer is a kind of role (in the food chain process ; in an ecosystem). 
a plant is a kind of living thing. all living things have life cycles. an animal is a kind of living thing. 
taste is a kind of property. dissolving a substance in water causes the water to taste like that substance. sugar is a kind of substance. 
a carbonated beverage contains dissolved carbon dioxide. soda is a kind of beverage. carbon dioxide is a kind of gas. a beverage is a kind of liquid. 
degrees fahrenheit ( F ) is a unit used for measuring temperature generally used for values between -450 and 50000000. degrees celsius ( C ) is a unit used for measuring temperature generally used for values between -273 and 50000000. degrees kelvin ( K ) is a unit used for measuring temperature generally used for values between 0 and 50000000. measuring is used for describing an object. objects are made of (materials ; substances ; matter). melting point means temperature (at which a solid melts ; above which a solid melts). 
boiling point means temperature (at which a liquid boils ; above which a liquid boils). (boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. heating means adding heat. heat means heat energy. heating a liquid can be used to identify that liquid 's boiling point. boiling point is a property of a (substance ; material). a liquid is a kind of substance. the properties of something can be (used to identify ; used to describe) that something. 
food is a kind of chemical energy. usually plants store the food they produce for future use. form means kind. 
a mirror reflects light. a mirror is a kind of reflective object. a mirror is used for reflecting light. the function of something is what that something is used to do. to work means to function. 
a switch is used to (start ; stop) the flow of current in an electrical circuit. flowing is a kind of motion. 
a toaster is a kind of electrical device. electrical devices convert electricity into other forms of energy. electricity means electrical energy. heat is a kind of energy. form means kind. a toaster converts electrical energy into heat energy for toasting. heat means heat energy. 
a toaster is a kind of electrical device. electrical devices convert electricity into other forms of energy. electricity means electrical energy. heat is a kind of energy. heat means heat energy. a toaster converts electrical energy into heat energy for toasting. a device is a kind of object. an object is an item. converting is similar to producing. 
the digestive system is a kind of body system. the esophagus is a part of the digestive system. the stomach is a part of the digestive system. the small intestine is a part of the digestive system. 
In the (cellular respiration ; respiration) process carbon dioxide is a waste product. carbon dioxide is a kind of gas. animals exhale carbon dioxide from their lungs into the air. 
thermal conduction is when materials conduct heat through those materials. to conduct is similar to to transfer. metal is a kind of material. metal is a (thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. a thermal energy conductor transfers heat from (warmer objects ; hotter objects) to cooler objects. (pot ; pan ; frying pan) is made of metal for cooking. being (on something ; placed in something ; placed over something) means touching that something. if (one surface ; one substance ; one object) touches something then one is exposed to that something. a pot is a kind of object. if (a thermal conductor ; an object) is exposed to a source of heat then (that conductor ; that object) may become (hot ; warm). a stove generates heat for cooking usually. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. if liquid is boiling then that liquid is hot. water is a kind of liquid. 
mimicry is used for avoiding predators by animals by camouflaging as a dangerous animal. a predator eats other animals for food. a butterfly is a kind of insect. an insect is a kind of animal. birds sometimes eat insects. eating a monarch butterfly causes a predator to become sick. being sick is a kind of (problem ; harm). something dangerous can cause harm. looking like is similar to camouflaging as. coloration means a pattern of colors. coloration is a kind of adaptation for (hiding ; camouflage). 
metal is an (electrical ; electrical energy) conductor. metal is a kind of material. material means substance. the function of something is what that something is used to do. conducting is a kind of function. a wire is a part of an electrical circuit for conducting electricity. a wire is usually made of metal. 
independent variables are usually placed on the (x-axis ; horizontal axis) of a graph. 
dependent variables are usually placed on the (y-axis ; vertical axis) of a graph. 
Earth 's magnetic patterns are used for finding locations by animals that migrate. a bird is a kind of animal. migration is when animals move to different locations in an annual cycle. An example of migration is birds flying south in the winter. 
a lens is a part of a telescope. building a tool requires knowing about the parts of that tool. a telescope is a kind of instrument for (observing celestial objects ; observing the sky). instrument means tool. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. 
attracting is a kind of (function ; activity). producing light is used for attracting prey by some deep sea animals. deep sea animals live deep in the ocean. a deep sea animal is a kind of marine organism. 
as the kinetic energy of a molecule increases , the temperature will increase. a thermometer is used to measure temperature. 
poisonous darts are used for defense by sea anemones. 
eagles eat fish. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). an (animal ; living thing) requires nutrients for survival. an animal needs to eat food for nutrients. an eagle is a kind of bird. a bird is a kind of animal. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. a beak is used for catching prey by some birds. predators eat prey. an eagle is a kind of predator. eating prey requires catching prey. (strong beaks ; sharp beaks) are a kind of adaptation for catching prey. 
a satellite is a kind of instrument for observing Earth 's surface. an instrument is a piece of equipment. determining often requires (measuring ; observing). topography means the physical features of a planet 's surface. Earth is a kind of planet. the United States is a kind of country. countries are located on the surface of the Earth. 
as temperature in an environment decreases , the amount of water an animal in that environment will lose will decrease. (colder ; cooler) means lower in temperature. to lower means to decrease. a climate is synonymous with an environment. (animals ; living things) require water for survival. a desert environment is low in availability of water. less is similar to decrease. to lose means to have less of. the decrease of something required by an organism has a negative impact on that organism 's survival. an animal is a kind of organism. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. helping something has a positive impact on that something. as the activity of an animal increases , the amount of water in an animal 's body in that environment will decrease. increase means more. the night has cooler temperatures than the day. 
as the size of the eyes of an animal increases , the ability of that animal to see will usually increase. larger means (greater ; higher ; more) in size. increase means more. an owl is a kind of bird. a bird is a kind of animal. hunting requires (seeing ; sensing) prey. night is low (in light ; in visibility). difficulty seeing means visibility decreases. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. hunting is when an animal kills another animal to eat that animal. an animal needs to eat food for nutrients. an (animal ; living thing) requires nutrients for survival. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. an adaptation is an advantage. advantage has a positive impact on something. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). an adaptation is a kind of characteristic. trait is synonymous with characteristic. if a living thing requires something then that something has a positive impact on that living thing. 
a kitten is a (young ; baby) cat. the colors of the parts of an organism are inherited characteristics. a cat is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. feature is synonymous with characteristic. inheriting is when a inherited characteristic (is copied ; is passed) from parent to offspring by (genetics ; DNA). (children ; young) is synonymous with offspring. 
weathering means breaking down (rocks ; surface materials) from larger whole into smaller pieces by weather. break apart means break down. a plant 's roots slowly break down rocks as the roots grow. a tree is a kind of plant. weathering is a kind of process. 
if fossils of a water animal or plant are found in a place then that animal or plant used to live in that place. an island is a kind of landform. a landform is a kind of place. warm-weather organisms live in warm climates. a plant is a kind of organism. 
a renewable resource can be renewed. a tree can be replaced by planting a new tree. a renewable resource can be replaced. a seed is a kind of young plant. planting is a kind of human action. an event is a kind of action. 
solar energy is an inexhaustible resource. sunlight is a kind of solar energy. 
a delta is formed by deposition of sediment at the mouth of a river by water fanning out. 
a mountain is a kind of landform. the surface of the Earth contains mountains. the surface of the Moon contains mountains. landform means (surface feature ; physical feature ; land feature). if something exists on a surface then that surface contains that something. 
a decomposer is a kind of living thing. an organism is a living thing. decomposition is when a decomposer breaks down dead organisms. a plant is a kind of organism. an animal is a kind of organism. decomposition is when a decomposer (recycles ; returns) nutrients from dead organisms to the soil by eating those dead organisms. nutrients are a kind of matter. 
a phase change is a kind of physical change. a phase change is when (matter ; a substance) changes from one state into another state. melting means changing from a solid into a liquid by adding heat energy. (boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. freezing means changing from a liquid into a solid by reducing heat energy. solid is a kind of state of matter. liquid is a kind of state of matter. gas is a kind of state of matter. a kind of something is an example of that something. 
iron is always magnetic. iron is a kind of metal. metal is a (thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. a thermal energy conductor transfers heat from (warmer objects ; hotter objects) to cooler objects. to conduct is similar to to transfer. metal is a kind of material. material means substance. 
freezing point is a property of a (substance ; material). water is a kind of substance. freezing point is a kind of physical property. 
UV mean ultraviolet. tinted lenses reflect ultraviolet rays. UV light is a kind of light. tinted lenses are a part of sunglasses for protecting the eyes by reflecting light. the sun is a source of (light ; light energy) called sunlight. sunlight contains ultraviolet light. ultraviolet rays means ultraviolet light. 
a plant is a kind of living thing. decomposition is when a decomposer breaks down dead organisms. an animal is a kind of living thing. an organism is a living thing. to improve means to have a positive impact. an organism is made of organic matter. organic matter has a positive impact on soil texture. decomposition increases amount of organic matter in soil. if something has a positive impact on something else then increasing the amount of that something has a positive impact on that something else. 
greatest means (largest ; highest ; most). summer is a kind of season. the amount of daylight is greatest in the summer. as the amount of daylight increases , sunset will occur later in the day. high is similar to increase. 
the moon rising occurs once per day. a moon is a kind of celestial (object ; body). movements of celestial bodies are a kind of event. rising is a kind of motion. 
a hot plate is a kind of instrument. a hot plate is a source of heat. instrument means tool. a source of heat can be used to heat something. a thermometer is a kind of instrument for measuring temperature. a thermometer is used to measure temperature. heating a liquid can be used to identify that liquid 's boiling point. water is a kind of liquid. determining often requires (measuring ; observing). identifying is similar to determining. boiling point means temperature (at which a liquid boils ; above which a liquid boils). 
length is a property of the shape of an object. long means great in length. thickness is a property of an object and includes ordered values of (thin ; thick). a (long tail ; thick tail) can be used to move through water by an animal. to be used for something means to help to do that something. helping something has a positive impact on that something. to improve means to have a positive impact. swimming is when (humans ; animals) can move in water. an ocean is a kind of body of water. a body of water contains water. 
the Grand Canyon was formed by the Colorado River flowing over long periods of time. the Grand Canyon is a kind of canyon. a canyon forming occurs over a period of millions of years. 
forming (coal ; fossil fuels) requires decaying vegetation. oil is a kind of fossil fuel. coal is a kind of fossil fuel. vegetation means plants. plants appearing on Earth is a kind of event. the formation of something is a kind of process. if an event is required for a process then that event must occur before that process can occur. 
(glass ; objects made of glass) cause refraction of light. an eyeglass lens is often made of glass. an eyeglass lens is a kind of object. lenses are a part of eyeglasses. a kind of something is an example of that something. 
a bird is a kind of animal. to make something easier means to help. as the weight of an animal decreases , that animal will fly more easily. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). helping something has a positive impact on that something. lighter means (lower ; less) in weight. hollow bones are lighter in weight. less is similar to decrease. 
vibrating matter can produce sound. blowing air into a whistle causes air to vibrate inside the whistle. air is a kind of matter. 
erosion causes a river to become deeper and wider. the Grand Canyon was formed by the Colorado River flowing over long periods of time. the Colorado River is a kind of river. erosion is a kind of process. the Grand Canyon is a kind of canyon. most canyons are formed by flowing rivers through erosion over long periods of time. 
each of the moon 's phases usually occurs once per month. a new moon is a kind of phase of the moon. once per means every. 
an inexhaustible resource is a kind of renewable resource. solar energy is a renewable resource. the sun is the source of solar energy called sunlight. 
the Sun is a kind of star. planets orbit stars. Earth is a kind of planet. gravity causes orbits. gravity means (gravitational pull ; gravitational energy). 
a delta is formed by deposition of sediment at the mouth of a river by water fanning out. deposition is a kind of natural process. to cause the formation of means to form. to cause means to be responsible for. the Mississippi Delta is a kind of delta. 
trees are a renewable resource. a renewable resource can be replaced. a tree can be replaced by planting a new tree. 
if something has a positive impact on something else then increasing the amount of that something has a positive impact on that something else. if a living thing requires something then that something has a positive impact on that living thing. an organism is a living thing. predators eat prey. if an organism eats something then that something is a source of frood to that organism. a predator eats other animals for food. a predator is a kind of animal. resources becoming available has a positive impact on the things that need those resources. an animal needs to eat food for nutrients. an animal is a kind of living thing. an (animal ; living thing) requires nutrients for survival. affecting an organism 's niche means affecting that organism. food is a kind of resource. to impact means to affect. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. 
the circulatory system transports blood throughout the body. transporting is a kind of function. to have a function is similar to to be responsible for. 
electrical conduction is when (metals ; electrical conductors) conduct electricity through (a wire ; electrical conductor ; metal). to conduct is similar to to transfer. 
deposition is a kind of natural process. stalactites are formed by deposition. to cause the formation of means to form. 
a positive impact is a helpful effect. a microscope is a kind of tool for observing small things. microscope is used to see (small things ; microscopic things ; specimens) by making them appear bigger. observe means see. to be used for something means to help to do that something. helping something has a positive impact on that something. bacteria is (small ; microscopic) in size. 
diamond is a kind of mineral. talc is a kind of mineral. if one mineral can scratch another mineral then that other mineral is softer than that one mineral. can be means able to be. 
a mirror has a shiny surface. shiny (things ; objects) reflect light. a surface is a part of an object. 
a switch is used to (start ; stop) the flow of current in an electrical circuit. when electricity flows to a light bulb , the light bulb will (turn on ; come on). completing a circuit causes (electricity ; electric current) to flow through that circuit. (flipping ; pushing) a switch means (using ; activating) that switch. a light bulb converts electrical energy into light energy when it is turned on. light means light energy. 
telephones convert sound energy into electrical energy. sound is a kind of air vibration. telephones are used for communication by two people by transmitting sound. sound means sound energy. electrical signals are made of electrical energy. 
fur is usually part of a mammal. (thick fur ; thick feathers) can be used for keeping warm. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). keeping warm is the opposite of becoming cold. dying is the opposite of (living ; surviving). if a living thing becomes too cold then that living thing will die. if the (environmental temperature ; air temperature) is too cold then (an animal ; a living thing) in that environment may become cold. a mammal is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. temperature is a property of weather. 
an animal is a kind of living thing. heat and pressure change the remains of prehistoric living things into natural gas. 
a microscope is a kind of tool for observing small things. microscope is used to see (small things ; microscopic things ; specimens) by making them appear bigger. studying is similar to observing. 
a planet rotating causes cycles of day and night on that planet. Earth is a kind of planet. the Earth rotates on its axis on its axis. a cycle is a kind of process. a process is a kind of event. 
ecological succession means entire communities in an ecosystem change over time. 
a Punnett square is used to (show ; identify ; calculate) the percent chance of a trait being passed down from a parent to its offspring. 
revolving around something means orbiting that something. the moon orbits the Earth. gravity causes orbits. gravity pulls objects towards planets. pull is similar to attract. a moon is a kind of celestial (object ; body). 
copper is a kind of metal. metal is a (thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. heat energy is synonymous with thermal energy. heat means heat energy. metal is a kind of material. a good conductor is a conductor. 
the (freezing point of water ; melting point of water) is (32F ; 0C ; 273K). freezing point means temperature (at which a liquid freezes ; below which a liquid freezes). degrees fahrenheit ( F ) is a unit used for measuring temperature generally used for values between -450 and 50000000. 
lightning is a kind of electricity. electricity means electrical energy. form means kind. a kind of something is an example of that something. 
soil erosion means soil loss through (wind ; water ; animals). soil erosion is when (wind ; moving water ; gravity) move soil from (fields ; environments). sand is similar to soil. a beach is a kind of (habitat ; environment). sand is a part of a beach. shrinking decreases size. soil loss causes an area decrease in size. to cause means to result in. a beach is usually part of an island. 
an electric car uses less gasoline than a regular car. using a gasoline engine requires burning gasoline. lower means less. oil is a kind of fossil fuel. oil is a source of gasoline. an electric car is a kind of invention. 
how long something takes is a kind of measurement of time. a stopwatch is a kind of tool for measuring time. a (watch ; clock ; stopwatch) is used for measuring time. determining often requires (measuring ; observing). 
the digestive system breaks food into nutrients for the body. breaking down is a kind of function. 
a complete revolution of the Earth around the sun takes (1 ; one) (year ; solar year ; Earth year). how long something takes is a kind of measurement of time. years are a kind of unit for measuring time. 
milliliters ( mL ) is a unit used for measuring volume generally used for values between 1 and 1000. recording an observation sometimes requires measuring. 
winter is when a hemisphere is tilted away from the sun. winter is a kind of season. 
wood is an (electrical ; electrical energy ; thermal energy) insulator. wood is a kind of natural material. heat energy is synonymous with thermal energy. heat means heat energy. 
boiling point is a property of a (substance ; material). water is a kind of substance. boiling point is an intensive property. degrees celsius ( C ) is a unit used for measuring temperature generally used for values between -273 and 50000000. stay the same means not changing. as the temperature of something increases , the intensive properties of that something will not change. 
metal is an (electrical ; electrical energy) conductor. electrical conduction is when (metals ; electrical conductors) conduct electricity through (a wire ; electrical conductor ; metal). metal is a kind of material. if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. a wire is a kind of object. a cable is similar to a wire. electrical energy is a kind of energy. a type is synonymous with a kind. conductivity is a property of a (material ; substance). to conduct is similar to to transfer. to carry means to transport. carrying is similar to conducting. 
different is the opposite of the same. if two animals have the same food source then those two animals compete for food. if two animals live in different environments then those two animals will have different food sources. a lizard is a kind of animal. an iguana is a kind of lizard. an (animal ; living thing) requires nutrients for survival. an animal is a kind of living thing. an animal needs to eat food for nutrients. a body of water is a kind of environment. land is a kind of environment. 
wind is a renewable resource. uneven heating causes convection. uneven heating of the Earth 's surface cause wind. producing is similar to causing. generate means produce. wind is a source of energy. an energy source is a kind of resource. 
heat can change the state of matter. can means having the ability to. 
a shower is a source of hot water for washing. hot means high in (heat energy ; temperature). water is a kind of liquid. steam is hot in temperature. steam is a kind of gas. the temperature of steam decreases after a shower. condensation is when change from a gas into a liquid by reducing heat energy. to reduce means to decrease. temperature is a measure of heat energy. moisture means (liquid ; liquid water). condensing causes a liquid to form. 
sugar dissolves in water when they are combined. 
when light enters the eye through the pupil , that light falls on the retina. light enters the eye through the pupil. if an object reflects light toward the eye then that object can be seen. a retina is part of an eye for sensing light. eyes are used for seeing by animals by sensing light. 
a balance is used for measuring (mass ; weight) (of an object ; of a substance). a balance is a kind of instrument for (measuring mass ; measuring weight). instrument means tool. a brick is a kind of object. 
the brain is a part of the central nervous system. the spinal cord is a part of the central nervous system. 
the Alps were formed by rock folding. the Appalachians were formed by rock folding. the Himalayas were formed by rock folding. the Alps are a kind of mountain range. the Appalachians are a kind of mountain range. the Himalayas are a kind of mountain range. 
silver is a kind of metal. metal is an (electrical ; electrical energy) conductor. best means most positive. good means positive. a good conductor is a conductor. 
gravity causes orbits. the moon orbits the Earth. to keep a process or event happening is similar to causing that process or event to happen. a motion is a kind of (event ; action). revolving is a kind of motion. revolving around something means orbiting that something. 
mixing is a kind of activity. mixing (baking soda ; water) causes an explosion. explosions can cause harm to an organism. eyes are usually part of an animal for seeing. a student is a kind of human. a human is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. safety goggles are used for protecting the eyes during experiments. protecting something means preventing harm to that something. safety goggles are a kind of safety gear. a human wears gear. 
adding is a kind of activity. if liquid is boiling then that liquid is hot. water is a kind of liquid. hot means high in (heat energy ; temperature). heat means heat energy. if too much heat is transferred to an object then that object may burn. greater means (higher ; more) in value. amount is a property of something and includes ordered values of (none ; least ; little ; some ; half ; much ; many ; most ; all). a student is a kind of human. a human is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. a living thing is a kind of object. burning a living thing usually causes harm to that living thing. (laboratory apron ; laboratory coat) is a kind of safety gear for protecting a person during an experiment. protecting something means preventing harm to that something. person is synonymous with human. a human wears gear. 
a graduated cylinder is a kind of instrument for measuring volume of liquids or objects. an instrument is a piece of equipment. rain is a kind of water. water is a kind of liquid. a graduated cylinder is used to measure volume (of a liquid ; of an object). a rain gauge is a kind of graduated cylinder. 
beads of water are formed by water vapor condensing. condensing means changing from a gas into a liquid by reducing heat energy. water is in the gas state , called water vapor , for temperatures between (373 ; 212 ; 100) and 100000000000 (K ; F ; C). water is in the liquid state , called liquid water , for temperatures between (273 ; 32 ; 0) and (373 ; 212 ; 100) (K ; F ; C). cold means low in temperature. to lower means to decrease. to reduce means to decrease. temperature is a measure of heat energy. 
a complete revolution of the Earth around the sun takes (1 ; one) (year ; solar year ; Earth year). revolving around something means orbiting that something. one year is equal to 365 days. 
a flame are a part of a fire. fire gives off (light ; heat ; smoke). to give off means to be the source of. if (a thermal conductor ; an object) is exposed to a source of heat then (that conductor ; that object) may become (hot ; warm). metal is a (thermal ; thermal energy) conductor. metal is a kind of material. if an object is made of a material then that object has the properties of that material. a rod is a kind of object. conductivity is a property of a (material ; substance). being (on something ; placed in something ; placed over something) means touching that something. a thermal energy conductor transfers heat from (warmer objects ; hotter objects) to cooler objects. to conduct is similar to to transfer. a thermometer is a kind of instrument for measuring temperature. instrument means tool. a tool is a kind of object. 
an event is a kind of action. a complete electrical circuit is a source of electrical energy. electric devices require electrical energy to function. a doorbell is a kind of electric device. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. ringing is a kind of function of a doorbell. a doorbell is a kind of bell. if something causes a process then that something is required for that process. to cause means to make. ringing is a kind of action. a process is a kind of event. 
an event is a kind of action. the lungs are a part of the respiratory system. blood is a part of the circulatory system. the heart is a part of the circulatory system. the circulatory system brings oxygen from the lungs to the rest of the body. returning is similar to bringing. bringing is a kind of action. a process is a kind of event. 
if an object is black then that object absorbs all (visible light ; heat). a can is a kind of object. collecting is similar to absorbing. amount is a property of something and includes ordered values of (none ; least ; little ; some ; half ; much ; many ; most ; all). black is a kind of color. painting an object a color causes that object to be that color. 
oil is a source of gasoline. if (an object ; a substance) makes something then (that object ; that substance) is a source of that thing. oil is a kind of substance. 
wind is a renewable resource. an energy source is a kind of resource. wind is used for producing electricity. make means produce. inexhaustible means always available. wind is an inexhaustible resource. an inexhaustible resource is a kind of renewable resource. 
the sun is the source of solar energy called sunlight. solar energy is a kind of energy. photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. a diatom is a kind of producer. food is a kind of chemical energy. chemical energy is a kind of energy. if food is not immediately used by the body for energy then that food will be stored for future use. (fossil fuels ; fossils) are formed by dead organisms over time. oil is a kind of fossil fuel. to make means to form. remains mean parts of a dead organism. a diatom is a kind of organism. the sun is the source of energy for life on Earth. an organism is a living thing. life means living things. 
loud means high in (sound energy ; sound intensity). sound is a kind of sound energy. as the force with which an object is touched increases , the amount of mechanical energy converted to sound energy will increase. greater means (higher ; more) in value. increase means more. a drum is a kind of musical instrument. a musical instrument is a kind of object. a hit is a kind of touch. musical instruments make sound when they are played. converting is similar to producing. make means produce. playing a drum means (banging ; hitting) a drum. 
wind is a renewable resource. inexhaustible means always available. an inexhaustible resource is a kind of renewable resource. an energy source is a kind of resource. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. water is a renewable resource. a kind of something is an example of that something. 
if fossils of a water animal or plant are found in a place then that place used to be covered by water in the past. a seashell is sometimes a part of a water animal. ocean shell means seashell. a landform is a kind of place. a mountain is a kind of landform. a mountain top is a part of a mountain. 
avoiding predators has a positive impact on (prey 's ; an organism 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). helping something has a positive impact on that something. a moth is a kind of insect. an insect is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). mimicry is used for avoiding predators by animals by camouflaging as a dangerous animal. looking like is similar to camouflaging as. wasp 's stinger contains poison. a stinger is used for (defense ; stinging) by (a wasp ; a bee). poison causes harm (to living things ; organisms). a predator is a kind of animal. something dangerous can cause harm. a wasp is a kind of insect. 
a stem is a source of support for a plant. a tree is a kind of plant. a flower is a kind of plant. if two things perform the same function then those two things are similar. to provide something means to be the source of that something. providing support is a kind of function. 
helping something has a positive impact on that something. avoiding predators has a positive impact on (prey 's ; an organism 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). (avoiding predators ; escaping predators ; avoiding consumers) is a kind of protection Move to PREDATOR-PREY.. hiding is a kind of protection (against predators ; from predators). camouflage is used for (protection ; hiding) by (prey ; animals) (against predators ; from predators). An example of camouflage is when something (is ; has) the same color as its environment. brown is a kind of color. bark is usually brown in color. bark is a protective covering around the (trunk of ; branches of) a tree. a nest is made of branches. a nest is a kind of shelter for birds. an organism 's shelter is a part of that organism 's environment. a bunting is a kind of bird. a bird is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. species means a group of like organisms. female birds sit in nests. 
weathering is a kind of erosion. erosion is a kind of process. form means kind. a plant 's roots slowly break down rocks as the roots grow. a tree is a kind of plant. break apart means break down. weathering means breaking down (rocks ; surface materials) from larger whole into smaller pieces by weather. ice wedging is a kind of mechanical weathering. ice wedging is when ice causes rocks to crack by expanding in openings. water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). frozen means solid. 
ice wedging is a kind of mechanical weathering. cycles of freezing and thawing water cause ice wedging. ice wedging is when ice causes rocks to crack by expanding in openings. form means kind. water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). freezing means changing from a liquid into a solid by reducing heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. 
a canyon is a kind of landform. landform means (surface feature ; physical feature ; land feature). most canyons are formed by flowing rivers through erosion over long periods of time. to cause the formation of means to form. to cause means to result in. 
a puppy is a (young ; baby) dog. as the amount of food an animal eats increases , the weight of that animal will increase. a dog is a kind of animal. heavy means a large amount of weight. larger means (greater ; higher ; more) in size. increase means more. 
digestion is when stomach acid breaks down food. acid can cause chemical change. An example of a chemical change is acid breaking down substances. food is a kind of substance. 
limiting something is a kind of activity. construction means building. building usually requires cutting down trees. cutting down a forest means cutting down the trees in that forest. forest is synonymous with wooded area. removing forests means removing animal habitats. removing a forest means cutting down a forest. destroying a forest means cutting down the trees in that forest. destroying something causes harm to that something. protecting something means preventing harm to that something. 
grass is a kind of green plant. green plants are a kind of producer. photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. solar energy is a kind of energy. the sun is the source of solar energy called sunlight. In the photosynthesis process (carbon dioxide ; water ; sunlight) has the role of raw material. using a raw material sometimes requires absorbing that raw material. to receive sunlight means to absorb sunlight. if something is a raw material then that something comes directly from a source. a plant is a kind of organism. 
heat is a kind of energy. a burner is a part of a stove. a stove generates heat for cooking usually. generate means produce. 
rust forming is a kind of chemical change. a type is synonymous with a kind. 
same means (identical ; equal). if two equal forces in opposite directions act on an object then that object will stay in the same place. a girl is a kind of (young ; female) human. a human is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. a living thing is a kind of object. a pull is a kind of force. 
oil is a nonrenewable resource. carpooling is a kind of activity. carpooling decreases the amount of cars used to travel to a place. work is a kind of place. a car is a kind of vehicle. vehicles usually require gasoline to operate. oil is a source of gasoline. to be used for something means to be required by that something. using less of a resource means conserving that resource. less is similar to decrease. a kind of something is an example of that something. 
recycling (resources ; nonrenewable resources) has a positive impact on the (environment ; conservation of those resources). if something has a positive impact on something else then that something is important to that something else. 
solar energy is a renewable resource. oil is a nonrenewable resource. as the use of renewable resources use of renewable resources increases , use of nonrenewable resources will decrease. oil is used for producing electricity. producing electricity sometimes requires burning oil. burning (gasoline ; oil) is a source of pollution. pollution has a negative impact on the (environment ; air quality). decreasing something negative has a positive impact on a thing. to improve means to have a positive impact. 
using cell phones can cause people to become distracted. being distracted while driving can cause people to crash their car. crashing a car causes harm to a person. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. (a concern ; a problem) is a possible negative impact. 
trees are a renewable resource. replanting a plant means replacing that plant. a tree is a kind of plant. An example of (managing ; maintaining) the number of something is replacing that something. planting is a kind of human action. planting trees is the opposite of cutting down trees. deforested area means an area where trees have been cut down. 
a plant is a kind of living thing. insects can have a negative impact on crops. a farmer farms (crops ; plants) for food. (a concern ; a problem) is a possible negative impact. a pesticide is used for protecting plants by killing insects. controlling insects means killing insects. protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). crops are a kind of edible plant for eating. solution is similar to a positive impact. runoff is when cropland water (enters ; runs off into) bodies of water. a stream is a kind of body of water. runoff contains (chemicals ; fertilizer ; pollutants ; pesticides) from cropland. pollution is when humans pollute the environment with pollutants. pollution has a negative impact on the (environment ; air quality). impact means effect. to cause means to have an effect. creating is similar to causing. 
the nervous system is the vehicle for controlling the body. controlling is a kind of function. 
a fish is a kind of aquatic animal. an (aquatic animal ; aquatic plant) requires great amounts of water to (survive ; thrive). the decrease of something required by an organism has a negative impact on that organism 's survival. drought means available water decreases in an environment. a body of water is a kind of environment. a pond is a kind of body of water. an animal is a kind of organism. to impact means to affect. to reduce means to decrease. a population is made of one type of organism in an area. an environment means an area. an environment is similar to an ecosystem. aquatic (animals ; plants) live in bodies of water. a type is synonymous with a kind. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. 
to impact means to affect. a factor impacts something. as distance to an ocean decreases , the temperature the temperature will decrease. climate is the usual kind of weather in a location. temperature is a property of weather. a decrease is a kind of change. affected means changed. area is similar to location. 
water is a kind of liquid. syrup is a kind of liquid. oil is a kind of liquid. denser liquids settle below liquids that are less dense. density is a property of (an object ; a substance) and includes ordered values of (dense ; not dense). a liquid is a kind of substance. placing liquids in the same container and observing how those liquids settle can be used to compare the densities of those liquids. 
friction is a kind of force. friction is used for stopping a vehicle by brakes. a bicycle is a kind of vehicle. friction acts to counter the motion of two objects when their surfaces are touching. a brake is a kind of object. a vehicle is a kind of object. a surface is a part of an object. brakes touch the wheels of a vehicle when activated. a bicycle contains (levers ; wheels and axles ; pulleys ; screws). counter means (reduce ; stop ; resist). 
a switch is used to (start ; stop) the flow of current in an electrical circuit. (flipping ; pushing) a switch means (using ; activating) that switch. when a switch in a simple series circuit is closed , electricity will flow through the circuit. an electrical device requires electricity to turn on. a light bulb is a kind of electrical device. a light bulb converts electrical energy into light energy when it is turned on. electricity means electrical energy. converting is similar to producing. make means produce. 
using less of a resource means conserving that resource. fewer means (lower ; less) in number. conserving resources has a positive impact on the environment. helping something has a positive impact on that something. a light bulb is a kind of electrical device. electric devices require electrical energy to function. electricity means electrical energy. electrical energy is a kind of energy. to be used for something means to be required by that something. 
fast means quickly. to impact means to affect. speed is a measure of how fast an object is moving. travel means to move. thunder is a kind of sound. when sound reaches the ear , that sound can be heard. when something reaches something else , that something has usually completed its movement. a factor impacts something. the type of material through which sound passes changes the speed at which sound travels. affected means changed. 
a cell is very small. seeing small things is difficult. to view means to see. microscope is used to see (small things ; microscopic things ; specimens) by making them appear bigger. observe means see. 
skills are learned characteristics. jumping rope is a kind of skill. a type is synonymous with a kind. 
dead organisms decay. a leaf is a part of a green plant. a plant is a kind of organism. decomposition is when a decomposer (recycles ; returns) nutrients from dead organisms to the soil by eating those dead organisms. returning is similar to adding. to add means to increase. plants absorb (nutrients ; water ; oxygen) from soil into themselves through their roots. a (plant ; living thing) requires nutrients to grow. the increase of something required by an organism has a positive impact on that organism 's survival. if something has a positive impact on something else then that something is important to that something else. role is similar to importance. a plant is a kind of organism. organisms are a part of an environment. an environment is similar to an ecosystem. soil contains nutrients for plants. containing something is similar to providing that something. 
atmosphere means air. the atmosphere is a kind of area. a plane travels through the atmosphere. the atmosphere contains (gases ; liquids ; solids). 
the Sun is the star that is closest to Earth. as distance from an object decreases , that object will appear larger. close means low in distance. the Sun is a kind of star. a star is a kind of (celestial object ; celestial body). low is similar to decrease. 
dead organisms decay. an organism is a source of organic matter. decomposition increases the amount of nutrients in the soil. decomposition is when a decomposer breaks down dead organisms. getting something increases the amount of that something. 
(boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. becoming is similar to changing. water is a kind of liquid. heating means adding heat. heat means heat energy. a stove generates heat for cooking usually. a (pan ; frying pan) is used for cooking food by heating food in it on a stove. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. a source of something increases the amount of that something. heat means temperature increases. temperature is a measure of heat energy. to add means to increase. 
cooking causes a chemical reaction. chemical reactions cause (new substances ; different substances) to form. material means substance. to make means to form. chemical reactions cause chemical change. 
In the food chain process an animal has the role of consumer which eats (producers ; other animals) for food. green plants are a kind of producer. carnivores only eat animals. to eat means to consume food. an animal needs to eat food for nutrients. needing something means depending on that something. to be dependent on something means to depend on that something. 
population is a measure of the number of a species in an environment. a woodpecker is a kind of bird. birds sometimes eat insects. predators eat prey. as population of predators decreases , the population of prey will increase in an environment. a forest is a kind of environment. species means a group of like organisms. a bird is a kind of animal. an insect is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. 
a body of water is a source of water. runoff is when cropland water (enters ; runs off into) bodies of water. runoff contains (chemicals ; fertilizer ; pollutants ; pesticides) from cropland. pollution is when humans pollute the environment with pollutants. pollution has a negative impact on the (environment ; air quality). a body of water is a kind of environment. impact means effect. to cause means to have an effect. to cause means to result in. using a pesticide usually requires spraying that pesticide on crops. cropland is used for farming by humans. farming is when a human plants crops for food. 
using a car causes pollution. fewer means (lower ; less) in number. less is similar to decrease. to reduce means to decrease. many vehicles emit pollution into the air. a car is a kind of vehicle. if something causes an increase in something else then that something produces that something else. emit means produce. a tripe in a vehicle requires using that vehicle. 
photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. converting is similar to producing. make means produce. sunlight means solar energy. sugar is a kind of simple carbohydrate. In the photosynthesis process (carbon dioxide ; water ; sunlight) has the role of raw material. if something is a raw material in a process then that something is required for that process. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. 
recycling reduces the resources needed to make something. trees are a kind of resource. creating paper requires cutting down trees. (to depend on ; to rely on ; to need) means to require. to produce means to create. removing a forest means cutting down the trees in that forest. removing forests means removing animal habitats. if a habitat is removed then that habitat is destroyed. to be destroyed means to cease to exist. if an (animal 's ; organisms) habitat (no longer exists ; ceases to exist) then (that animal ; that organism) will die. killing means harming something causing death. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. protecting something means preventing harm to that something. protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). an animal is a kind of organism. an organism is a living thing. to keep something from happening means to prevent that something. a positive impact is a benefit. decreasing something negative has a positive impact on a thing. to reduce means to decrease. organisms are a part of an environment. 
precipitation is when (rain ; snow ; hail) fall from clouds to the (Earth ; ground). rain is a kind of water. (animals ; living things) require water for survival. a frog is a kind of amphibian. an amphibian is a kind of animal. hibernation is used for conserving (energy ; resources) by some animals. water is a kind of natural resource. when available resources decrease in an environment , organisms have to conserve those resources. dry means low in (amount of water ; wetness ; moisture). to lower means to decrease. an animal is a kind of organism. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. An example of hibernation is a frog burying itself in mud. when a hibernating frog emergest from mud , that frog has ended its hibernation. 
sandy soil is found in dry environments. condition is a property of an environment. if an organism can live in an environment then that organism can withstand the conditions of that environment. a plant is a kind of organism. 
the Earth revolves around the sun. revolving around something means orbiting that something. Earth orbiting the Sun causes seasons to change. 
Earth 's tilt on its axis causes seasons (to change ; to occur). to cause means to result in. 
An example of reproduction is laying eggs. birds lay eggs. a duck is a kind of bird. reptiles lay eggs. a turtle is a kind of reptile. 
a desert environment is usually hot in temperature. long ears are used for releasing heat by a jackrabbit. long ears are a part of a rabbit. a jackrabbit is a kind of rabbit. if something releases something else then that something else decreases in that something. hot means high in (heat energy ; temperature). heat means heat energy. if an organism becomes too hot then that organism may die. a rabbit is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of organism. too much is similar to increase. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. (nonliving ; non-living ; die) is the opposite of (living ; alive ; live). survive means live. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). helping something has a positive impact on that something. a part of a living thing is a natural structure. an organism is a living thing. 
Earth 's tilt on its axis causes seasons (to change ; to occur). 
photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. sugar is a kind of simple carbohydrate. converting is similar to producing. 
(thick fur ; thick feathers) can be used for keeping warm. keeping warm is the opposite of becoming cold. if a living thing becomes too cold then that living thing will die. an owl is a kind of bird. a bird is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. (nonliving ; non-living ; die) is the opposite of (living ; alive ; live). survive means live. (an adaptation ; an ability) has a positive impact on an (animal 's ; living thing 's) (survival ; health ; ability to reproduce). cold environments are usually white in color from being covered in snow. an environment means an area. snow is white in color. An example of camouflage is when something (is ; has) the same color as its environment. camouflage is a kind of adaptation for hiding in an environment. if the feathers of a bird are a color then that bird is that color. living in an environment causes an organism to adapt to that environment. to cause means to result in. an organism is a living thing. 
. renewable is the opposite of nonrenewable. a renewable resource can be replaced. an energy source is a kind of resource. 
(fossil fuels ; fossils) forming occurs over a period of 300000000 years which is considered a very long time to a human. nonrenewable resources forming occurs over a period of 300000000 years which is considered a very long time to a human. an energy source is a kind of resource. fossil fuels are a nonrenewable resource. 
warning people of dangers has a positive impact on the safety of those people. helping something has a positive impact on that something. a positive impact is a benefit. warning people of something requires (knowing about ; predicting) that something. storm is a kind of (weather ; weather event). inventing a tool (allows ; enables) that tool to be used. developing means (creating ; inventing). technology is similar to tool. satellite technology is used for predicting the weather. 
bad weather decreases visibility while driving. a decrease in visibility while driving can cause people to crash their car. crashing a car causes harm to a person. safe is the opposite of (harm ; danger). windshield wiper increases visibility while driving in bad weather. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. a windshield wiper is a kind of tool for increasing visibility while driving in bad weather. an invention is a kind of tool. helping something has a positive impact on that something. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. 
an earthquake is a kind of natural event. an earthquake changes Earth 's surface quickly. fast means quickly. 
the Earth being tilted on its axis causes seasons. June is during the summer in the northern hemisphere. June is during the winter in the southern hemisphere. the summer solstice is on June 21st in the northern hemisphere. the winter solstice is on June 21st in the southern hemisphere. summer is a kind of season. winter is a kind of season. the amount of daylight is greatest on the summer solstice. the amount of daylight is least on the winter solstice. greater means (higher ; more) in value. fewer means (lower ; less) in number. daylight means sunlight. 
Earth 's tilt on its axis causes seasons (to change ; to occur). to cause means to be responsible for. 
winter is a kind of season. winter in a hemisphere occurs when the Pole located in that hemisphere is tilted away from the Sun. 
(mass ; weight) is a property of (matter ; objects ; materials). a rock is a kind of object. comparing requires measuring. a balance is a kind of instrument for (measuring mass ; measuring weight). a balance is used for measuring (mass ; weight) (of an object ; of a substance). 
a balance is a kind of instrument for (measuring mass ; measuring weight). a balance is used for measuring (mass ; weight) (of an object ; of a substance). a liquid is a kind of substance. 
the Earth being tilted on its axis causes seasons. winter is a kind of season. (New York ; New York State) is a state located in the United States of America. Florida is a state located in the United States of America. New York is closer to the North Pole than Florida. close means low in distance. fewer means (lower ; less) in number. January is during the winter in the northern hemisphere. United States is located in the northern hemisphere. as the distance of a location from the North Pole becomes (smaller ; closer) , the amount of daylight received by that location will decrease during the winter. less is similar to decrease. 
photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. solar energy is a kind of light. solar energy is a kind of energy. form means kind. In the photosynthesis process (carbon dioxide ; water ; sunlight) has the role of raw material. if something is a raw material in a process then that something is required for that process. to be used for something means to be required by that something. an plant requires food for survival. 
a microscope is a kind of tool for observing small things. microscope is used to see (small things ; microscopic things ; specimens) by making them appear bigger. a cell is very small. 
solar energy is a renewable resource. a solar panel converts sunlight into electricity. electricity sometimes is used for heating (buildings ; substances). water is a kind of substance. sunlight is a kind of solar energy. an energy source is a kind of resource. converting is similar to producing. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. if something comes from something else then that something else is a source of that something. 
the nervous system sends observations in the form of electrical signals to the rest of the body. to send means to transfer. the brain is a part of the body. the senses are used for making observations. 
the mouth is a part of the digestive system used for eating. the esophagus is a part of the digestive system. the stomach is a part of the digestive system. 
omnivores eat (plants ; animals). nuts are a kind of fruit. fruit is a part of a (plant ; tree). a berry is a kind of fruit. bees convert nectar into honey. a flower is a source of nectar. a flower is a part of a plant for (attracting pollinators ; producing seeds). an insect is a kind of animal. a fish is a kind of animal. diet means what an animal eats. a bear is a kind of animal. bears eat (berries ; insects ; animals). 
as distance from a source of light increases , that source of light will appear dimmer. far means great in distance. greater means (higher ; more) in value. increase means more. a star is a source of (light ; light energy) through nuclear reactions. dimmer means less bright. the stars in the night sky are very far away from the Earth. the Sun is the star that is closest to Earth. far is the opposite of close. the Sun is a kind of star. 
to be used for something means to help to do that something. a pulley is a kind of simple machine. a simple machine is a kind of tool. a pulley is used for (lifting ; lowering) objects. a piano is a kind of musical instrument. a musical instrument is a kind of object. 
a refrigerator is used for keeping food fresh for a long period of time. fresh food is usually safe to eat. to protect means to make safe. protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). society is made of humans. a human is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. helping something has a positive impact on that something. 
as population of predators decreases , the population of prey will increase in an environment. disappearing is similar to decreasing. a deer is a kind of prey. 
a new season occurs four times per year. to pass means to occur. a complete revolution of the Earth around the sun takes (1 ; one) (year ; solar year ; Earth year). 
photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. converting is similar to producing. sugar is a kind of simple carbohydrate. sugar is a kind of substance. 
June is a kind of month. June is during the summer in the northern hemisphere. Florida is a state located in the United States of America. United States is located in the northern hemisphere. summer has the most sunlight. sunlight is a kind of solar energy. solar energy is a kind of energy. the summer solstice is on June 21st in the northern hemisphere. the amount of daylight is greatest on the summer solstice. daylight means sunlight. larger means (greater ; higher ; more) in size. 
the phases of the Moon change the appearance of the Moon. the moon (revolving around ; orbiting) the Earth causes the phases of the moon. 
. an energy source is a kind of resource. 
a plant absorbs carbon dioxide from the air for photosynthesis. take in means absorb. a plant requires sunlight for photosynthesis. 
a plant is a kind of living thing. a thorn is sharp. a thorn is a part of some plants. a part of something means a characteristic of something. feature is synonymous with characteristic. a sharp object can be used for protection. a thorn is a kind of object. protecting a living thing has a positive impact on that living thing 's (survival ; health). helping something has a positive impact on that something. protecting something means preventing harm to that something. eating (an animal ; a plant) means killing (that animal ; that plant). killing means harming something causing death. a leaf is a part of a green plant. 
microscope is used to see (small things ; microscopic things ; specimens) by making them appear bigger. a cell is very small. discovering something usually requires seeing that something. to discover means to make a discovery. a unicellular organism has one cell. 
a battery is a source of electrical energy. a source of something supplies that something. electrical energy is a kind of energy. electric devices require electrical energy to function. a flashlight is a kind of electrical device. to work means to function. an electrical device requires electricity to turn on. if an old battery no longer supplies electrical energy then that battery needs to be replaced. 
wind is a renewable resource. flying is a kind of motion air. a motion is a kind of (event ; action). action means activity. flying a kite requires wind. to be used for something means to be required by that something. an energy source is a kind of resource. 
as air pressure decreases , the chance of rain will increase. drop means decrease. An example of stormy weather is rain. becoming is similar to changing. if weather is stormy then there is a greater chance of rain. greater means (higher ; more) in value. increase means more. 
oil is a nonrenewable resource. natural gas is a nonrenewable resource. a nonrenewable resource is limited in supply. if a resource is limited in supply then that resource needs to be replaced. an energy source is a kind of resource. natural gas is a source of heat by burning. heat is a kind of energy. oil is a source of energy. 
sugar dissolves in water when they are combined. An example of combining two substances is pouring one substance into the other substance. sugar is a kind of substance. water is a kind of substance. 
an animal requires oxygen for (survival ; to breathe). (to help ; to benefit) means to be of use. useful means good to use. helping something has a positive impact on that something. if a living thing requires something then that something has a positive impact on that living thing. an animal is a kind of living thing. In the food chain process some types of plankton have the role of producer. photosynthesis means (producers ; green plants) convert from carbon dioxide, water, and solar energy into (carbohydrates ; food ; oxygen) for themselves. converting is similar to releasing. the sun is the source of solar energy called sunlight. 
natural gas is a nonrenewable resource. natural gas is a source of heat by burning. heat is a kind of energy. a nonrenewable resource is limited in supply. if a resource is limited in supply then that resource will run out. 
seat belts are used for preventing injuries to passengers in cars. harm means injury. harming something has a negative (impact on ; effect on) that something. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. helping something has a positive impact on that something. a passenger in a car is usually a human. person is synonymous with human. preventing something decreases the amount of that something. the function of something is what that something is used to do. improving the design of something helps that something to do its function. 
the mass of a planet causes the pull of gravity on that planet. Earth is a kind of planet. 
a palm tree is a kind of tree. a tree is a kind of plant. sea grass is a kind of plant. In the food chain process a green plant has the role of producer. a producer is a source of energy for consumers. consumers eat other organisms. to provide something means to be the source of that something. (eating ; taking in) food is used to get (nutrients ; energy) by (animals ; living things). an organism is a living thing. 
plant cells can perform photosynthesis. animal cells can not perform photosynthesis. 
the Earth being tilted on its axis causes (ones side of the Earth ; one hemisphere) to receive less energy from the Sun than the other side. the Earth being tilted on its axis causes seasons. summer is a kind of season. winter is a kind of season. when the season changes , the amount of daylight will change. Earth 's tilt on its axis causes seasons (to change ; to occur). daylight is when the sun shines on a location. daylight means sunlight. the sun is a source of (radiation ; heat) called sunlight. heat is a kind of energy. place is synonymous with location. increase means more. less is similar to decrease. an increase is a kind of change. a decrease is a kind of change. an increase is the opposite of a decrease. 
a light bulb is a part of a lamp. to convert means to change. form means kind. light is a kind of energy. a light bulb converts electrical energy into light energy when it is turned on. 
hearing is used for sensing sound by animals. Paul is a name for a human. a human is a kind of animal. sound means sound energy. sound waves means sound energy. sound can travel through air. air is a kind of matter. 
Earth 's tilt on its axis causes seasons (to change ; to occur). 
combustion is a kind of chemical change. to combust means to catch fire. fire causes burning. 
An example of creating an alternative fuel is turning plant material into fuel. a positive impact is a benefit. oil is a kind of pollutant. oil is a source of gasoline. burning (gasoline ; oil) is a source of pollution. using a gasoline engine requires burning gasoline. to reduce means to decrease. as the use of alternative fuels increases , the use of gasoline will decrease. decreasing something negative has a positive impact on a thing. pollution is when humans pollute the environment with pollutants. pollution has a negative impact on the (environment ; air quality). negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. 
summer is when a hemisphere is tilted towards the sun. a half of Earth is a hemisphere of Earth. the amount of daylight is greatest in the summer. winter is the opposite of summer. the Northern Hemisphere is a kind of hemisphere of Earth. a plant requires sunlight to grow. greater means (higher ; more) in value. 
if something releases something else then that something is the source of that something else. an animal requires oxygen for (survival ; to breathe). beneficial means helpful. helping something has a positive impact on that something. the increase of something required by an organism has a positive impact on that organism 's survival. a source of something increases the amount of that something. an increase is a kind of change. plants are a source of oxygen through photosynthesis. 
artificial turf is a fake grass. conserving resources has a positive impact on the environment. water is a kind of natural resource. using less of a resource means conserving that resource. beneficial means helpful. helping something has a positive impact on that something. fake plants use less water than real plants. grass is a kind of green plant. 
cutting down a forest means cutting down the trees in that forest. creating paper requires cutting down trees. removing forests means removing animal habitats. loss is similar to removal. creating wood-free paper does not require cutting down trees. cutting down trees has a negative impact on an (ecosystem ; organisms living in an ecosystem). an animal is a kind of living thing. an organism is a living thing. to impact means to affect. (a concern ; a problem) is a possible negative impact. removing a forest means cutting down the trees in that forest. 
dry means low in (amount of water ; wetness ; moisture). a farmer farms (crops ; plants) for food. a positive impact is a benefit. planting crops is synonymous with growing crops. as the amount of water received by a plant increases , that plant will usually grow. little means low in amount. 
ice wedging is a kind of mechanical weathering. when water freezes , that water expands. cracking something may cause that something to break apart. cycles of freezing and thawing water cause ice wedging. ice wedging is when ice causes rocks to crack by expanding in openings. a crack is a kind of opening. weathering means breaking down (rocks ; surface materials) from larger whole into smaller pieces by weather. break apart means break down. 
an animal is a kind of living thing. controlling the amount of pollution is similar to reducing the amount of pollution. to reduce means to decrease. cleaner means (less ; lower) in pollutants. less is similar to decrease. pollution has a negative impact on the (environment ; air quality). decreasing something negative has a positive impact on a thing. helping something has a positive impact on that something. person is synonymous with human. a human is a kind of animal. pollution is when humans pollute the environment with pollutants. an environment is similar to an ecosystem. 
recycling (reduces ; decreases) the amount of water sent to landfills. less means a reduced amount. trash is synonymous with waste. landfills have a negative impact on the (environment ; communities). recycling has a positive impact on the environment. helping something has a positive impact on that something. negative impact is the opposite of positive impact. 
roots are a part of a (plant ; tree). a structure of something is synonymous with a part of that something. 
the boiling point of water is (212F ; 100C ; 373K). degrees celsius ( C ) is a unit used for measuring temperature generally used for values between -273 and 50000000. boiling point means temperature (at which a liquid boils ; above which a liquid boils). water is a kind of liquid. 
the boiling point of water is (212F ; 100C ; 373K). 
the (freezing point of water ; melting point of water) is (32F ; 0C ; 273K). freezing point means temperature (at which a liquid freezes ; below which a liquid freezes). water is a kind of liquid. 
a biofuel is a kind of alternative energy resource. plants are a source of biofuel. a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. 
lightning occurs during lightning storms. storm is a kind of (weather ; weather event). lightning can cause a forest fire. 
a sprinkler requires water to function. the function of something is what that something is used to do. to be used for something means to be required by that something. as the use of a resource decreases , the length of time that resource will be available increases. water is a kind of natural resource. fewer means (lower ; less) in number. less is similar to decrease. how long something takes is a kind of measurement of time. to last longer means to be available longer. long means great in length. greater means (higher ; more) in value. increase means more. hours are a kind of unit for measuring time. 
xylem carries water from the roots of a plant to the leaves of a plant. water is a kind of substance. material means substance. to carry means to transport. roots are a part of a (plant ; tree). a leaf is a part of a green plant. 
phloem transports materials through the plant. if two things perform the same function then those two things are similar. transporting is a kind of function. xylem transports materials through the plant. 
a kidney is a kind of organ in an animal. the kidney (removes ; filters) (cell waste ; byproducts) from the blood. 
an organism breaking down sugar is a source of (carbon dioxide ; water). a source of something (emits ; produces ; generates) that something. an organism breaks down sugar to release energy. a plant is a kind of organism. 
the (lunar surface ; moon 's surface) contains many craters. if the surface of an object contains something then that object is covered with that something. a moon is a kind of celestial (object ; body). a crater is a kind of land feature. landform means (surface feature ; physical feature ; land feature). feature is synonymous with characteristic. 
a body of water is a kind of land feature. oceans contains most of earth 's water. oceans cover 70% of the surface of the earth. most means over 50%. 
a delta is a kind of geologic (structure ; landform). a canyon is a kind of landform. a delta is formed by deposition of sediment at the mouth of a river by water fanning out. most canyons are formed by flowing rivers through erosion over long periods of time. to make means to form. 
ice wedging is when ice causes rocks to crack by expanding in openings. ice wedging is a kind of mechanical weathering. weathering is a kind of erosion. erosion is a kind of change. Earth 's surface is made of rock. water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). a river is a kind of flowing body of water. a valley is formed by a river flowing. to make means to form. a canyon is a kind of landform. a canyon is a very deep valley. landform means (surface feature ; physical feature ; land feature). forming something is a kind of change. 
climate is the usual kind of weather in a location. average is similar to usual. temperature is a property of weather. 
climate is the usual kind of weather in a location. average is similar to usual. a region is a kind of location. 
climate is the usual kind of weather in a location. usual means does not vary much. 
oceans contains most of earth 's water. most means over 50%. (boiling ; evaporation) means change from a liquid into a gas by adding heat energy. water is a kind of liquid. 
tidal energy is a kind of alternative energy resource. hydropower is a kind of alternative energy resource. the gravitational pull of the Moon on Earth 's oceans causes the tides. gravity means (gravitational pull ; gravitational energy). if something causes a process then that something is required for that process. to be used for something means to be required by that something. tidal energy can be used to produce electricity. make means produce. hydropower is when falling water produces electricity. (gravity ; gravitational force) causes (objects that have mass ; substances) (to be pulled down ; to fall) on a planet. water is a kind of substance. 
a biofuel is a kind of alternative energy resource. biofuel releases carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. if something releases something else then that something is the source of that something else. a source of something increases the amount of that something. to add means to increase. 
hydropower is a kind of alternative energy resource. hydropower requires damming a river. damming a river can cause a lake to form. forming something is a kind of change. 
a biofuel is a kind of alternative energy resource. biofuel is used to produce electricity by burning. coal is used to produce electricity by burning in coal-fire power stations. 
the (freezing point of water ; melting point of water) is (32F ; 0C ; 273K). freezing point means temperature (at which a liquid freezes ; below which a liquid freezes). water is a kind of liquid. water is in the solid state , called ice , for temperatures between (0 ; -459 ; -273) and (273 ; 32 ; 0) (K ; F ; C). freezing means changing from a liquid into a solid by reducing heat energy. a thermometer is a kind of instrument for measuring temperature. a thermometer is used to measure temperature. measuring requires reading a measurement. 
the boiling point of water is (212F ; 100C ; 373K). boiling point means temperature (at which a liquid boils ; above which a liquid boils). water is a kind of liquid. a thermometer is a kind of instrument for measuring temperature. a thermometer is used to measure temperature. measuring requires reading a measurement. 
radiation can affect objects that are not touching. radiation is when heat is transferred through (waves ; particles). a wall is a kind of object. person is synonymous with human. a human is a kind of animal. an animal is a kind of living thing. a living thing is a kind of object. if someone is standing away from something then that someone is not touching that something. 
(mass ; weight) is a property of (matter ; objects ; materials). characteristic means property. 
vinegar can cause harm to the eyes. safety goggles are used for protecting the eyes during experiments. protecting something means preventing harm to that something. pouring is a kind of activity. 
